Implement the commitment undertaken by developed- country parties to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to a goal of mobilising jointly USD 100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and fully (For a comprehensive assessment of performance for SDG 7, see Tracking SDG 7 | Progress Towards Sustainable Energy (esmap.org) by IEA, IRENA, UNSD, World Bank, WHO).
We support efforts in domestic carbon pricing and carbon market instruments and international compliance markets to curb emissions, incentivise innovation, and generate resources that can be re-invested in climate action.
The intensity of the climate crisis calls for fostering the development of climate-responsive debt instruments .
We call on MDBs to mobilise additional financial resources to better address global issues such as biodiversity loss and climate change, both mitigation and adaptation, aligning their activities with the Global Biodiversity Framework and the Paris Agreement.
The EU supports science-policy panels as important tools to provide the latest science and evidence to help policymakers address global crises, including climate change, biodiversity loss and pollution.
The potential for major shocks, notably climate shocks, to derail development progress is prominent in these policy agendas.
The toolkit of PAF instruments is growing and governments must use financial products that provide the most cost-effective protection to

II.1.4 Addressing Systemic Issues Representation in the Wider Crisis Financing Architecture To emphasise recommendations from the Vulnerable 20 (V20) Group of Finance Ministers, from 68 climate-vulnerable countries from Africa, Asia, the Caribbean, Latin America, the Middle East, and the Pacific, there needs to be a greater representation and voting power within the global financial system to take forward the Accra-Marrakech Agenda and Bridgetown Initiative.
GRF 2025 will focus on developing frameworks for anticipatory climate finance, aiming to mobilize billions annually in sustainable development funding • Annual Event: Held in Geneva, targeting financial industry and policymakers •
Input | Domestic and international private business and finance 3.1 Public Private Partnerships in private provision of public services 3.2 Green Industrial Policy – greening private sector development 3.3 Financial inclusion for SME business – access to finance 3.4 Domestic and international private finance • Mobilise international private finance • Align sustainable/green finance • Improve central banking and financial regulation 4.
The need for industrial policy today, when the world needs to transition, is being acutely felt in the overarching market failures to counter the global effects of climate change arising from unabated greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions.
While climate-related financial risks remain key to global financial stability, it is also imperative that financial sector regulation shifts the financial intermediation for domestic finance towards SDGs through various instruments.
These include: • Boosting MDB Capacity: An independent review of MDB Capital Adequacy Frameworks, 2022 – G20 and COP • Climate Finance Framework: Independent High Level Expert Group on Climate Finance – COP • The Triple Agenda: Strengthening Multilateral Development Banks
Such a global reserve fund would have three premises: a) different countries face different kinds of climate risks; b) the fund would not require initial payments of public money and its nominal capitalisation could be based on a voluntary allocation of a share of a country’s SDRs ; and c) the fund would assume an initial loss but would transfer the bulk of the subscribed risk to existing market insurance mechanisms.
The International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) builds on the Climate Disclosure Standards Board (CDSB), the Task Force for Climate- related Financial Disclosures (TCFD), the Value Reporting Foundation’s Integrated Reporting Framework and industry-based Sustainability Accounting Standards Board (SASB) Standards, as well as the World Economic Forum’s Stakeholder Capitalism Metrics .
Additionally, private investors are less inclined to finance sectors like health and education or policy objectives like climate adaptation, due to low returns and smaller project sizes.
These include at least 30 taxonomies and 200 frameworks, standards and guidelines on sustainability and climate disclosures.
However, the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) estimates that nearly USD 6 trillion is needed for developing countries’ climate action plans by 2030, requiring additional resource mobilisation with between USD 500 billion and USD 600 billion annually in private finance by 2030.
UN (2024), The Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024 UN DESA (2024), Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2024 k World Bank (2024),‘Green, Social, Sustainability, and Sustainability -Linked (GSSS) Bonds Market Update OECD (2024), Sustainability-linked bonds The ISSB consolidated five major reporting standards, including: the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures, the Climate Disclosure Standards Board, which included the Carbon Disclosure Project, as well as the Value Reporting Foundation which housed the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board and the International Integrated Reporting Framework

12  DRAFT Green Finance Measures Database UNEP (n.d.), SDG Indicator 12.6.1 UN DESA (2024), Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2024 Trade Finance Global (2024), Report:
A climate finance framework: decisive action to deliver on the Paris Agreement.
Governments, multilateral organisations, and civil society have recently advocated for reform of the international debt architecture that focus on increasing low-cost public finance through reforms of multilateral development banks (MDBs) and the IMF, improving governance and representation within these institutions, and enhancing the agility and flexibility of lending mechanisms, particularly for countries vulnerable to climate change.
Innovative climate-related financial instruments can help respond to finance needs and debt challenges.
While no single instrument can solve a country’s debt situation, s everal climate-related financial instruments can help address both the climate finance needs and debt challenges of developing countries.
Center for Economic and Policy Research (2024), The Rising Cost of Debt: An Obstacle to Achieving Climate and Development Goals IMF (2023),
Debt instruments were the most frequently used financial tools for climate technology transfer projects, accounting for 68% of total development finance resources, while grants represented 30% and equity investments 2%.
Phasing out fossil fuel subsidies can alleviate fiscal burdens, freeing up resources for more productive investments in renewable energy, education, and healthcare, while aligning market signals with climate policy objectives.
Primarily, the Debt Convention should establish: A fair and transparent multilateral sovereign debt resolution mechanism, in order to deliver on sufficient debt restructuring and cancellation for the borrowing countries to be able to fulfil its international human rights obligations, achieve the SDGs, ensure gender equality, and implement the necessary climate actions.
Principles of responsible sovereign lending and borrowing, and promote legislation, both in lender and borrower countries, that mandates transparent and fair governance and management of sovereign debts New approach to debt sustainability framework and analyses (DSAs), ensuring that the assessment is aligned with human rights, climate and sustainable development needs, including ex-post and ex-ante gender, human rights and environmental impacts assessments and audits to identify illegitimate debts.
Automatic debt service cancellation mechanism that protects Global South countries from extreme climatic, environmental, economic, health, food and security shocks, and promotion of debt contract clauses that provide for sharing the risks of climate-related and other external shocks between lenders and borrowers.
A Global Financing Framework - FfD 4 represents an opportunity to address the gaps and shortcomings in development finance, climate action, and the broader financial global governance system.
7. Bringing tax policy issues into the negotiations on climate change.
Of these countries, 122 have indicated that "promoting policy coherence and alignment with the SDGs and the Paris Agreement" is a central component of their national disaster risk reduction (DRR) strategies, highlighting the significance of incorporating climate resilience and sustainable development.
https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/oecd-secretary-general-tax-report-to-g20-finance-ministers-and-central-bank-governors-g20-brazil-july-2024_3bacc6e8-en.html https://www.oecd.org/en/topics/sub-issues/country-by-country-reporting-for-tax-purposes.html https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/oecd-secretary-general-tax-report-to-g20-finance-ministers-and-central-bank-governors-g20-brazil-july-2024_3bacc6e8-en.html Tax co-operation | Compare your country E/RES/2017/3 https://star.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2024-04/StAR-annual-2023-06%20%281%29.pdf and https://star.worldbank.org/star-brochure-0 Asset Recovery Watch Database | Stolen Asset Recovery Initiative (StAR) (worldbank.org) https://unctad.org/system/files/official-document/ditccom2023d3_en.pdf https://eiti.org/sites/default/files/2023-06/EITI%2020th%20Anniversary%20Report-%20web.pdf Tax co-operation | Compare your country E/RES/2017/3 https://www.tiwb.org/resources/reports-case-studies/tax-inspectors-without-borders-annual-report-2024.pdf https://financing.desa.un.org/sites/default/files/2024-07/Revised%20draft%20ToR_18%20July%202024.pdf https://insai.worldbank.org/sites/default/files/2021-07/InSAI%202021%20Final%20Report_1.pdf https://internationalbudget.org/wp-content/uploads/IBP-OBS-Global-Report-2023-v4-Final-Artwork.pdf https://www.pefa.org/resources/supplementary-framework-assessing-gender-responsive-public-financial-management-0 https://www.iea.org/topics/energy-subsidies

DRAFT https://unhabitat.org/sites/default/files/2023/11/unlocking_the_potential_of_cities_-_financing_sustainable_urban_development_-_06-min.pdf https://africapolis.org/en https://www.oecd.org/en/publications/city-shapes-and-climate-change-in-africa_a944a930-en.html https://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/development/boosting-african-cities-resilience-to-climate-change_3303cfb3-en https://sdg-action.org/bridging-the-sdg-funding-gap-in-cities/ https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/full/10.1177/09562478241230290 https://www.cgdev.org/sites/default/files/miga-little-engine-should.pdf
See para 35 in the international and domestic private business and finance statistical annex for the latest progress report on the ten-year framework of programmes on sustainable consumption and production patterns (ECOSOC, May 2024) or the OECD report on climate finance provided and mobilised by developed countries in 2013-21.
(OECD Data Explorer – DAC5) ODA in support of marine technology in developing countries ODA in support of the ocean economy remained flat at roughly USD 2.6 billion in both

DRAFT 122 Strengthen coherence and synergies among UN initiatives such as the Commission on Science and Technology for Development, the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change Technology Mechanism, the Climate Technology Centre and Network, the W IPO’s capacity building, and the UN Industrial Development Organization’s No n.a. n.a.
ISDS also creates significant risks to climate policy and financing for development: our research finds that if countries take 1.5C aligned action to eliminate new fossil fuel extraction and development projects, ISDS claims from oil and gas asset owners could amount to as much as $340 billion.
IOM strongly supports states’ engagement in regional initiatives in this regard, such as the Pacific Regional Framework on Climate Mobility.
Trade agreements increasingly include sustainability considerations – for instance the 2024 Agreement on Climate Change, Trade and Sustainability – although the harmonisation of standards and carbon border adjustment mechanisms remains a challenging issue.
UNICEF Honduras supported the development of an integrated climate change resilience and child-sensitive social sector financing strategy, forming the basis of a 2023 proposal to access USD 17 million from the Green Climate Fund to reduce climate related child fragility.
Specific policy solutions call to - Align and harmonize all types of finance, including climate finance, to improve performance of response and recover; leverage private sector engagement to mobilise funds for social services, Disaster Risk Reduction (DRR), Climate Change Adaptation (CCA), Anticipatory Action (including market-based ex-ante financing instruments), and to address critical system bottlenecks to promote resilient development.
By addressing these areas, the donor community and policymakers can create an environment that maximizes the benefits of remi<ances and diaspora investments, reduces costs and supports sustainable development, climate resilience and economic stability in LMICs.
For instance, the absence of global co-ordination and policy coherence is hampers developing countries ’ access to climate finance and the equitable management of shared resources.
In 2021, the FSB published a comprehensive roadmap to address climate-related financial risks in four key policy areas: firm-level disclosures, data, vulnerabilities analysis, and regulatory and supervisory practices and tools.
Systemic issues_Concept Note.pdf , UN ECOSOC, 2023, Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, Report of the Secretary-General Supplementary Information UN ECOSOC, 2023, Progress towards the Sustainable Development Goals, Report of the Secretary-General Supplementary Information Financial Stability Board (2023), Global monitoring report on non-bank financial intermediation This refers to countries that have Adhered to the OECD Council Recommendation on Policy Coherence for Sustainable Development, see: https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0381 Nature (2024), The economic commitment of climate change .
Mandatory frameworks help align corporate action with broader societal goals and thus driving more meaningful progress towards sustainability and climate commitments.
This would accelerate progress toward the SDGs and climate goals, empowering businesses, investors, and policymakers to make informed decisions that drive business resilience and sustainable development.
B Strengthen local financial markets Increase size & liquidity of financial markets Update financial regulation to facilitate sustainable finance flows Key actions A Grow climate- positive real economy assets Design national and sectoral economic investment plans Tailor catalytic finance instruments to domestic investors Build capacity among domestic stakeholders Scale instruments that enable local currency transactions Design & Deploy catalytic finance more effectively C

Real world examples show that implementing these levers is inherently feasible; this action agenda is about scaling and replicating them in a systematic way.
While mobilisation ratios across different pools of public capital are often difficult to measure and compare, risk-sharing mechanisms which can mobilise private capital for climate tend to be under-utilised.
Guarantees are one example of a proven catalytic instrument that reduce an investor’s exposure to risks and can unlock private capital in EMDEs for low carbon infrastructure and other climate solutions.
Guarantees can mobilise five times more private capital than other instruments like loans, yet they make up only 4% of MDB commitments (compared to ~70% of MDB climate portfolios being loans – a critically important instrument, but one with low mobilisation ratios).
This paper lays out recommendations to tackle barriers to access guarantees, explores the benefits of different guarantee structures and offers a set of design principles for better climate finance instruments including streamlining governance, allowing more flexibility in product structuring, better accountability and closer connection to national planning, local investors and pipeline development.
Drawing on learnings from climate projects and the broader development finance community, and applying a systems-thinking approach, we have identified examples of Green Accountability mechanisms that could be replicated across the climate finance ecosystem.
Governance mechanisms which integrate local decision-makers to improve the upfront design of climate finance based on the demands of local stakeholders, ensuring meaningful agency in program design and implementation.
Green Accountability could: 10

Clarity on the sources of climate finance, in what form, with what conditions; spending should be transparent with mechanisms to account for, communicate and challenge results.
Deployment mechanisms should be domestic where possible to build institutional capacity Climate finance should be flexible enough with and collective expertise across end-users and ensure climate finance is deployed systemically to avoid siloed solutions.
Governance mechanisms which integrate local decision-makers to improve the upfront design of climate finance based on the demands of local stakeholders to ensure meaningful agency in programme design and implementation.
The disconnect between climate, humanitarian and development finance, for example, is further compounded by uncoordinated financial mechanisms and institutional barriers.
Countries are also eager to explore innovative instruments such as SDG bonds, blue bonds, and climate-resilient loans, but they need to fully understand the risks and trade-offs associated with these tools.
The Maldives’ gender-responsive climate financing strategy, for example, is advancing the energy transition and social inclusion to realize both its National Development Plan and NDCs.
It seeks to tap into all development, climate, and humanitarian financing flows – public, private, domestic, and international – by setting up alternative and innovative finance mechanisms to help governments leverage all funding sources, including non-traditional financial sources from the public and private sectors.
Noting the broader objectives of the FfD 4 that includes assessment of the previous FfD Conferences’ Outcome Documents and identifying the impediments to achievement of their objectives global and recommendations thereto, the members of the New Frontiers in Development Finance (NeFDeF) project would like to share their insights drawn from their international research expertise on the legal and policy architecture of broader sustainable development, development and climate finance and the growing trend towards increased private sector engagements with sustainable development objectives.
There is a risk that ODA will be diverted and re-labeled as ‘cllimate finance’, which would undermine the principle of ‘additionality’ of climate finance as

embedded in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement and may negatively affect the mobilization of financial resources in meeting other sustainable development objectives.
In addition, new development and climate finance initiatives such as JETPs are heavily reliant on debt instruments and market-based mechanisms – including loans, guarantees and sovereign bonds – to finance decarbonisation and economic transition plans, with official finance geared towards catalysing commercial sources of financing.
The ongoing debt crisis and lack of appropriate mechanisms for restructuring thereof also exacerbate the vulnerabilities caused by climate change among the least developed and island nations.
The fact that market-based instruments consist of debt-based climate finance raises concerns regarding their potential negative impacts on the progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights, as well as the SDGs.
Secretary General’s sixth Our Common Agenda policy brief on ‘Reforms to the International Financial Architecture’ offers an important contribution to this debate by setting out five concrete actions around how best to massively scale up financing and the SDG impact of public develop- ment banks: (1) Massively increase development lending and improve terms of lending; (2) Change the business models of MDBs and other public development banks to focus on SDG impact and more effectively leverage private finance for SDG impact; (3) Massively increase climate finance, while ensuring additionality; (4) More effectively use the system of development banks to increase lending and SDG impact; and (5) Ensure that the poorest can continue to benefit from the MDB system.
Climate Policy Initiative.
climatepolicyinitiative.org/publication/global-landscape-of- climate-finance-a-decade-of-data/ Daly, H. E. (2008).
S C I. A global financing framework Reforming Macroprudential Policies, Climate and Development Policies, and the World Bank 1)
Since risk-mitigation mechanisms (e.g., guarantees from multilateral development banks and others) used in blended finance are not properly recognized, financial institutions using blended finance are unnecessarily pe-

3) More coordinated action and capital mobilization across the climate and development spheres are needed.
So far, international discussions and frameworks around climate and development are mostly separated.
e. Debt and Debt Sustainability ACM advocates for innovative financing instruments such as debt-for-technology swaps and debt-for-climate swaps, which allow countries to reduce their debt burden while simultaneously investing in crucial areas like digital transformation and climate adaptation.
3. Climate Change and Financing for Resilience As climate-related risks intensify, there is an urgent need for financing mechanisms that prioritize climate resilience.
ACM advocates to prioritize financing mechanisms that not only support these technologies but also ensure they are also aligned with a broader commitment to reducing inequality and empowering the most vulnerable populations to respond eNectively to climate risks.
- Welcomes the policy recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development contained in the report A/79/209 to scale-up the use of debt-swaps for Sustainable Development Goals , including for climate and nature, and calls for the development of a multilateral strategy, building on these recommendations, aiming at simplifying and improving the design, transparency and financing of debt swaps, and including concrete measures to support developing countries to overcome challenges associated with the costs of transaction, technical assistance, information-sharing, credit enhancement and risks, among others.
The convention should encompass the following elements: ★ Fair and transparent multilateral debt cancellation and restructuring ★ Binding responsible sovereign lending and borrowing principles, and accountability for their implementation ★ New approach to debt sustainability framework and analyses (DSAs) aligned with climate and sustainable development needs ★ Automatic debt service cancellation mechanism that protects Global South countries from extreme events related to climatic, environmental, economic, and security shocks ★ Debt contract clauses that provide for sharing the risks of climate-related and other external shocks between lender and borrower ★ A binding global debt registry to promote transparency ★ Debt audits to investigate and identify cases of debt illegitimacy ★ The establishment of legislation, both in borrowing and lender countries, to ensure a democratic and transparent governance and management of sovereign debt and fair debt resolution.
Table 1 provides Climate Policy Initiative data on tracked global climate finance from 2017 to 2022.
public collaboration can effectively internalize the interdependence of climate action with sustainable and equitable development as a matter of policy priority.
New research papers on MDB and NDB climate finance relationships show promise in existing collaborations but underscore that little is known, more research needs to be done, and policy efforts need to be made to enhance MDB and NDB collaboration (Marois, Stewart, and Marodon 2023; CPI/ E3G 2023).
The Nordic Investment public banks can adjust the terms of loans Bank has a climate policy banning future to help advance shared climate policy, investments in carbonizing energy.
By making global development and climate finance policy-driven rather than profit-driven, this finance becomes cheaper and more affordable.
Capture or corruption of public development and climate finance Conventional economic thinking also points to what is perceived to be the inherent inefficiencies and corruption of public institutions, regardless of their governance frameworks.
The failure of NDBs and MDBs to foster a global ecosystem will see Member States and policymakers continue to struggle to realise meaningful development and climate finance commitments and to demonstrate meaningful impacts on sustainable development and just transitions.
Members Masood Ahmed President Emeritus, Center for Global Development Juan-Camilo Cardenas Professor, Department of Economics, University of Massachusetts Amherst and Universidad de Los Andes, Colombia Simon Cueva Rector, Universidad Internacional del Ecuador and former Minister of Economy and Finance, Ecuador Kevin Gallagher Professor of Global Development Policy and Director, Boston University Global Development Policy Center Sandrine Gaudin Vice-Governor (Financial Strategy), Council of Europe Development Bank Ma Jun Founder and President, Institute of Finance and Sustainability, Beijing Frannie Leautier Partner and CEO, SouthBridge Investment, and former Chief of Staff to the President and Vice President, World Bank Group Isabelle Mateos y Lago Group Chief Economist, BNP Paribas Wanjira Mathai Managing Director for Africa and Global Partnerships, World Resources Institute Irene Monasterolo Professor of Climate Finance, School of Economics, Utretcht University Avinash Persaud Special Advisor on Climate Change to the President, Inter-American Development Bank Anthony Requin General Inspector of Finance, French Ministry of Economy and Finance Brad Setser Whitney Shepardson Senior Fellow, Council on Foreign Relations, Washington DC Stacy Swann Founder of Resilient Earth Capital and former CEO, Climate Finance Advisors Jeromin Zettelmeyer Director, Bruegel think tank, Brussels, and former Deputy Director, Strategy and Policy Review Department, IMF 2
Executive Summary 7

An immediate priority is to reform Debt Sustainability Frameworks (DSFs) to provide a better analytical and policy basis for addressing sovereign debt issues in the context of the climate and nature crises.
However, the tide and narrative are changing, and it is increasingly acknowledged at a global policy level - quite some time after it was flagged by the most climate vulnerable countries - that we cannot continue to operate under these false dichotomies and artificially entrenched ideas of linearity.
c. International development cooperation Acknowledging that existing funding arrangements fall short of responding to current and future impacts of climate change, and in line with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and ultimately the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we share the view that we must take further action in the face of rising loss and damage from climate impacts, to protect lives, livelihoods and development gains, and help ensure the dignity and rights of those who endure the worst impacts of climate change.
This includes but is not limited to Public Financial Management, Social Welfare Systems, Financial Systems, official DRM structures and capacities and other relevant departments such as Health, Education, Sanitation etc 5) Call for a comprehensive and coordinated effort to achieve these goals with – not in isolation but in support of existing frameworks and initiatives that seek to address specific issues related to climate adaptation, long term resilience building and humanitarian needs.
The global financing framework must consider the intersection of climate change, poverty, and health, supporting cross-sectoral interventions that address these challenges simultaneously.
2. Boosting joint action on climate Recent progress MDBs progress on joint commitments on climate since the 28 Conference of the Parties (COP 28) of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) include: Paris Agreement alignment.
MDBs continue to share their experience in supporting client countries, sub-national entities, and private sector clients in climate policy development and delivery.
These include results-based instruments that reward greater ambition, external guarantees to increase lending capacity for climate action, policy-based guarantees to support debt conversion to generate trust funds for climate and biodiversity action, sustainability-linked and thematic bonds, contingent mechanisms to access emergency finance in response to disasters, insurance products that transfer risk associated with disasters, and contractual disaster clauses that postpone payments on principal during natural disaster recovery.
The policy matrix supporting this operation will enhance the climate governance as well as foster climate and water policy conditions.
Looking ahead We will continue to expand our support to countries and other public and private clients in delivering on the Paris Agreement through policy change, climate finance, and innovative financial instruments.
The MDBs’ common approach aims to foster consistency and comparability across MDBs in climate results measurement and to contribute to international efforts to establish standardized frameworks for assessing climate progress and guiding future climate action.
To increase co-financing and efficiency, and maximize the impact of our operations, the MDBs will work together during 2024 towards (i) implement procurement practices that support sustainable procurement, sustainable infrastructure, and the climate change agenda; (ii) further promote the adoption and use of alternative procurement arrangements across MDBs to facilitate the use of MRAs; and (iii) develop a framework to demonstrate better Value for Money in procurement.
With appropriate policy choices, developed countries have the means to mobilize well over USD 5 trillion in public climate finance per year .
While there have been numerous court cases against private companies, those relating to state responsibility and liability in terms of the climate crisis are currently being negotiated, including in the International Court of Justice, the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea The FfD process is crucial in terms of raising awareness and creating the political momentum for a mechanism to allow for the consideration of reparations, particularly pertaining to economic justice.
However, the tide and narrative are changing, and it is increasingly acknowledged at a global policy level - quite some time after it was flagged by the most climate vulnerable countries - that we cannot continue to operate under these false dichotomies and artificially entrenched ideas of linearity.
c. International development cooperation Acknowledging that existing funding arrangements fall short of responding to current and future impacts of climate change, and in line with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change and the Paris Agreement, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction, and ultimately the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, we share the view that we must take further action in the face of rising loss and damage from climate impacts, to protect lives, livelihoods and development gains, and help ensure the dignity and rights of those who endure the worst impacts of climate change.
This includes but is not limited to Public Financial Management, Social Welfare Systems, Financial Systems, official DRM structures and capacities and other relevant departments such as Health, Education, Sanitation etc 5) Call for a comprehensive and coordinated effort to achieve these goals with – not in isolation but in support of existing frameworks and initiatives that seek to address specific issues related to climate adaptation, long term resilience building and humanitarian needs.
A Global Financing Framework............................................................................................16 2.1 Overview of Global Financing Needs..............................................................................16 2.1.1 Financing Gaps in Sustainable Development.........................................................16 2.1.2 The Role of Finance in the Water-Food-Health Nexus...........................................17 2.2 Cross-Cutting Issues in Financing for Development........................................................17 2.2.1 Climate Change and Environmental Sustainability.................................................17 2.2.2 Poverty Reduction and Inequality...........................................................................18 2.2.3 Gender Equality and Social Inclusion.....................................................................18 2.2.4 Good Governance and Institutional Capacity.........................................................18 2.3 Principles of the UNFSD Framework...............................................................................19 2.3.1 Integration and Synergy..........................................................................................19 2.3.2 Efficiency and Effectiveness...................................................................................19 2.3.3 Transparency and Accountability............................................................................19 2.3.4 Equity and Inclusiveness........................................................................................19 2.3.5 Resilience and Sustainability..................................................................................20 2.4 Innovative Financial Instruments and Mechanisms.........................................................20 2.4.1 Blended Finance.....................................................................................................20 2.4.2 Impact Investing......................................................................................................20 2.4.3 Green and Blue Bonds............................................................................................21 2.4.4 Public-Private-Planet Partnerships.........................................................................21

3.a.1
Improving Logistics and Transportation.........................................................46 3.d.4.2 Digital Trade Platforms...................................................................................47 3.d.5 Trade Finance and Export Credit............................................................................47 3.d.5.1 Access to Trade Finance...............................................................................47 3.d.5.2 Export Credit Agencies and Guarantees.......................................................48 3.e Debt and Debt Sustainability...........................................................................................48 3.e.1 Global Debt Landscape..........................................................................................49 3.e.1.1 Trends in Sovereign Debt Levels...................................................................49 3.e.1.2 Debt Vulnerabilities in Developing Countries.................................................49 3.e.2 Debt Sustainability Analysis....................................................................................50 3.e.2.1 Frameworks and Methodologies....................................................................50 3.e.2.2 Incorporating Climate and Nexus Risks.........................................................51 3.e.3 Debt Relief and Restructuring Mechanisms............................................................51 3.e.3.1 Paris Club and Multilateral Initiatives.............................................................51 3.e.3.2 Private Sector Involvement............................................................................52 3.e.4 Innovative Debt Instruments...................................................................................53 3.e.4.1 GDP-Linked Bonds........................................................................................53 3.e.4.2 Catastrophe Bonds and Disaster Risk Financing..........................................53 3.e.5 Debt Transparency and Management....................................................................54

3.
Emerging Mechanisms ● Santiago Network for Loss and Damage : Operationalizing the network to provide technical assistance to countries vulnerable to climate change impacts.
It acknowledges that climate change exacerbates inequalities and economic instability, necessitating a global financing framework prioritizing climate action within the Nexus.
This aligns with FFD4's call for enhancing global

Incorporating Sustainable Debt Solutions , UNFSD supports comprehensive debt restructuring frameworks, including debt-for-climate and debt-for-nature swaps , to promote long-term debt sustainability.
It also promotes Innovative Financing Mechanisms like international solidarity taxes and global climate funds to finance international development priorities.
● Policy Dialogue and Advisory Services : Engage with governments to improve the investment climate and provide technical assistance.
Collaborative responses to pandemics, climate change, and food security crises are vital to the UNFSD framework.
Established under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) , the GCF finances climate change mitigation and adaptation projects in developing countries, pivotal in the global climate response and achieving the Paris Agreement goals.
3.c.6 Emerging Mechanisms by 2025 As global challenges evolve, new mechanisms are being developed to address emerging needs, particularly related to climate change, loss and damage, and resilience building.
Established under the Warsaw International Mechanism for Loss and Damage associated with climate change impacts, the Santiago Network aims to catalyze technical assistance for developing countries that are particularly vulnerable to the adverse effects of climate change.
Support for Vulnerable Countries : Provides targeted assistance to countries disproportionately affected by climate change, enhancing resilience, recovery, and sustainable development within the UNFSD framework.
3. c.6.2 Other Mechanisms Available by 2025 ● Global Goal on Adaptation ○ Mandate ■ Under the Paris Agreement , parties are working towards establishing a Global Goal on Adaptation to enhance adaptive capacity, strengthen resilience, and reduce vulnerability to climate change.
Integration with Global Institutions The Observatory Protocol collaborates with global institutions to enhance its impact: ● United Nations Agencies : Aligning with UN frameworks on disaster risk reduction, climate action, and sustainable development.
Future Development and Scaling The OP is designed for continuous evolution to meet emerging challenges: ● Integration with Climate Finance Mechanisms : Leveraging data-driven approaches to access and manage climate adaptation funds.
This includes policy changes, technological advancements, and shifts in market preferences to mitigate climate change.
● Frameworks and Standards ○ Financial Disclosure Frameworks (FDFs) ■ Recommendations : The FDFs provide a framework for companies to disclose climate-related financial risks in four areas: governance, strategy, risk management, and metrics and targets.
NGFS Scenarios ■ Provide standardized scenarios for central banks and supervisors to assess climate risks, considering different trajectories of climate policy and physical impacts.
● Supporting International Frameworks ○ Global Monitoring Reports : International organizations produce reports that assess global progress on SDGs, climate change, and other vital areas.
● Financial Instruments for Adaptation Developing financial mechanisms, such as climate adaptation funds and resilience bonds, mobilizes resources specifically for adaptation efforts.
Increasing and boosting PDBs’ means to finance sustainable development - Proceed to a capital adequacy framework (CAF) review and balance sheet optimization work at the perimeter of FiCS - Create a fast track or “one for all” accreditation process that would simplify access to multilateral funds for PDBs that have undergone substantive efforts of climate and SDG alignment and work towards streamlining the negotiation process after accreditation 5.
Geographically: insufficient amounts and accessibility of financial resources to the most vulnerable countries - Urgency to streamline the multiplicity of frameworks and standards on sustainable development financing that troubles accountability and incentives o ODA, TOSSD, climate finance, competing taxonomies, ESG criteria etc. - Capacity to unlock more ambition to implement the 2030 Agenda and the SDGs, the Paris Agreement on Climate Change, the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction and the Kunming-Montreal Biodiversity Framework, with a special focus on scale and leveraging effects required from public and private resources Objective: redirecting financial flows (public and private) towards sustainable and inclusive development to achieve a just transition that leaves no one behind.
Encouraging and assisting all PDBs to adopt sustainability impact assessments/filters as an internal steering mechanism for financing decisions, enabling better characterization of alignment or misalignment with sustainability goals, in line with PDBs’ sustainable development financing mandate o Bolstering the adoption on a global level the MDBs-IDFC Common principles for climate and SDGs aligned finance - Explicitly mention the role of PDBs of all sizes in the assessment, the design and the implementation of the national green investment strategy in Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), Long- Term Strategies (LTS), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans (NBSAPs).
Increase the capital of all PDBs and concessional finance flows, building on their respective comparative advantages and to increase the quality of their operations o Proceed to a Capital Adequacy Framework (CAF) review and balance sheet optimization work at the perimeter of FiCS - Create a fast track or “one for all” accreditation process that would simplify access to multilateral funds for PDBs that have undergone substantive efforts of climate and SDG alignment and work towards streamlining the negotiation process after accreditation o Allow TA and capacity-building programs for capacity-lacking PDBs to gain access to multilateral climate funds which accreditation requires massive efforts - Leverage local currency solutions and risk mitigation instruments to attract domestic private capital : see FiCS and IDFC work with TCX to develop a capacity building program to strengthen currency risk management combined with concessional hedging program - Foster dedicated technical assistance to support the refining of PDBs activities for a systematic integration of environmental and social considerations.
In particular, more grants should be dedicated to technical assistance for project preparations and the setting of widely accessible project preparation funds - Make the most of the PDBs ecosystem’s expertise to foster innovative financial instruments at the service of sustainable development (e.g. Climate-resilient-debt clauses, local currency risks management, or Debt-to-nature swaps) 5.
It would also provide a clearer basis for iden(cid:415)fying targeted policy interven(cid:415)ons (protec(cid:415)ve factors) to strengthen resilience, support sustainable development, and align with the broader goal of climate jus(cid:415)ce.
3. Incorpora(cid:415)ng disaster-linked debt relief mechanisms into credit ra(cid:415)ng methodologies Climate-related disasters lead to severe economic disrup(cid:415)ons, o(cid:332)en requiring substan(cid:415)al financial resources for recovery.
This will require coordinated efforts of all stakeholders — including credit ra(cid:415)ng agencies, interna(cid:415)onal financial ins(cid:415)tu(cid:415)ons, MDBs, governments, and the private sector — in establishing a new credit ra(cid:415)ng mechanism and en(cid:415)ty that recognises both risks and opportuni(cid:415)es for investment in climate resilience and social development.
(a revised version will soon be published at Climate Policy) UN DESA (United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs )(2024): Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2024, Financing for Development at a Crossroads, Inter-agency Task Force on Financing for Development (IATF) report,https://desapublications.un.org/publications/financing-sustainable-development-report-2024 UN-DESA & IPSF (United Nations-Department of Economic and Social Affairs and International Platform on Sustainable Finance).
Corruption risks are a major concern for climate finance Without adequate oversight mechanisms and robust anti-corruption safeguards, the massive amount of funds dedicated to tackling the climate crisis risk being misappropriated, stolen or squandered.
- Establishing anti-corruption safeguards and oversight mechanisms in climate financing to ensure the proper financial management of climate funds, globally and at the regional and national levels.
- Formally addressing the linkages between corruption, organized crime and climate change through systematic coordination and cooperation between the UNCAC and environmental agreements such as the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), the UN Convention against Transnational Organized Crime (UNTOC), the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).
AEF identifies five key areas where this partnership can have the greatest impact: · Domestic Resource Mobilization & Combatting Illicit Financial Flows; · Global Tax & Reform of International Financial Architecture; · Carbon Markets and Energy for Locally Led Industrialization; · Resilient Health Systems and Climate-Health Financing; · Mechanisms for Policy/Financial Commitment Tracking.
Enhance Capacity for Climate Finance Mobilization : The Climate Policy Initiative estimates that Africa needs $2.8 trillion from 2020 to 2030 to meet its Nationally Determined Contributions under the Paris Agreement, but currently mobilizes only $30 billion annually.
Carbon pricing mechanisms have the greatest potential for global climate and socio-economic impact if they pair the high demands for transparency, integrity and quality with fair and equitable market access and revenue distribution.
Access to financing instruments, e.g. the Green Climate Fund, requires simplification of administrative procedures and eligibility.
This cooperation, involving key elements such as Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs), Official Development Assistance (ODA), and climate finance mechanisms , aims to enhance resource mobilization, foster capacity building, and promote innovative financing approaches.
 Countries in debt distress often face significant climate vulnerabilities, prompting the exploration of innovative instruments such as Climate Resilient Debt Clauses (CRDCs) and debt swaps .
The renewed finance framework will require an integrated approach that boosts all sources of finance, public and private, domestic and international, to mobilize the scale and quality of finance required and deliver on the global development and climate goals.
It also means further aligning their activities with the goals of the multilateral climate funds like the GCF, creating a coordinated pipeline of financing, capacity building and policy support at country level that addresses both immediate adaptation needs and long-term decarbonization.
Policymakers must create the conditions for the private sector to invest more heavily in climate solutions, especially in the adaptation area.
This program helps countries strengthen their

example, the Green Climate Fund’s policies allow flexibility in financial instruments, including a risk appetite that supports a willingness to assume first-loss and junior positions which enables it to address clear investment barriers tailored to each investment to catalyze additional investment and deliver impact.
The following recommendations should be considered to enhance climate finance effectiveness and accessibility: 1. Supporting and improving complementarity : Member states should call for enhancing complementarity and coherence among key players in the highly-fragmented financing system; for a comprehensive rewiring of the multilateral development finance institutions to make more use of concessional and debt-free instruments, to better align with the current needs of developing countries; and a new country engagement model, with greater participation and decision-making power for these countries.
2. Scaling Blended Finance and adaptation financing : FFD4 should highlight the importance of blended finance mechanisms, public-private partnerships and de-risking instruments as essential tools for closing the climate finance gap.
Governments must commit to strengthening regulatory frameworks and addressing systemic constraints to scale blended finance and ensure that public funds are used strategically to de-risk private investments.

steps to harmonize application processes across climate funds, reduce bureaucratic barriers, and ensure faster disbursement of funds.
Promoting Accountability and Impact : FFD4 should advocate for improved mechanisms for tracking climate finance flows and assessing their impact.
In response, the Seville conference outcome scope should comprise a cross-cutting global policy framework shaped in full partnership with the private sector – including sustainability, global tax cooperation, trade and investment policies, upskilling, climate and energy, IPR protection, food and agriculture, and corporate responsibility issues such as transparency and anti-corruption.
A global financing framework for the urban under a climate emergency Today, we know that local and regional governments are key actors to localize the 2030 Agenda and responsible for a considerable 39.5% of public investment worldwide , according to the 2022 edition of the World Observatory on Subnational Government Finance and Investment .
To sum up, FfD4 should aim at improving the contribution of ODA to the economic development and welfare of developing countries, especially by: ● Adopting a funding target for gender equality that directs ODA to gender mainstreaming and programmes with gender-targeted actions and groups identified as the most marginalized; ● Making climate finance additional and delivering it by grants instead of loans; ● Enhancing the transparency in reporting private sector instruments so that concessionality can be properly assessed; ● Continuing progress to untie aid commitments to ensure all ODA is untied.
The primary reasons for this low level of participation are the typical challenges encountered with debt rescheduling mechanisms, including collective action problems, unequal involvement of different creditor groups and debtors in debt restructuring decision-making processes, the lack of a connection to climate risks and information asymmetries among stakeholders, which have resulted in socio-economic, political and intergenerational injustice.
This policy brief explores innovative approaches to mobilizing climate finance, focusing on both public and private sector contributions.
Alternative sources and Innovative Financial Instruments to Attract Private Investment : Scaling up blended finance, guarantees, and risk-sharing mechanisms is critical to de-risk climate projects and attract substantial private sector investment.
Green Climate Fund as a catalyst : The GCF is uniquely positioned to operationalize and scale innovative financial instruments due to its capacity to take on higher-risk projects and its focus on underserved frontier markets.
The fragmented international financial architecture, with insufficient alignment between climate finance mechanisms and development finance, hampers global efforts to meet the SDGs and respond effectively to the climate crisis.
Tailoring these financial instruments to the needs of low-income countries will help channel much-needed private capital into both climate mitigation and adaptation projects, narrowing the infrastructure gap and accelerating development.
Expanding risk-sharing mechanisms and sovereign climate insurance initiatives such as the Global Shield can strengthen protection against climate and disaster related risks for the most vulnerable.
3. Encourage the Use of Innovative Financial Instruments: The outcome document should call for the scaling up of innovative financial instruments — such as blended finance, guarantees, and risk-sharing mechanisms — to unlock private sector investment and de-risk climate projects.
Debt and debt sustainability Enhancing the applicability of debt-for-climate and nature swaps - The AAAA encouraged the study of new financial instruments for developing countries, particularly least developed countries, landlocked developing countries and small island developing States experiencing debt distress, noting experiences of debt-to-health and debt-to-nature swaps.
They allow countries to redirect debt service payments towards investments in sustainable development and climate action and can be a useful instrument for countries that do not have an unsustainable debt burden, but have limited fiscal space for investment.
- A few measures could help overcome these limitations, including: o Integration with international climate finance : link swaps with broader international climate finance mechanisms to increase funding sources and investment scalability.
Revising the IMF and WB Debt Sustainability Framework to tackle issues raised by developing countries, capture climate and nature risks better, alongside ensuring that adaptation investments are properly taken into account.
It could do so by convening the expert communities associated with the different financing frameworks to review how the frameworks propose to meet the financing required, how their estimates are done, SUBMISSION FOR THE FOURTH FINANCING FOR DEVELOPMENT CONFERENCE Towards a Coherent, Transformative Approach to Financing Sustainable Development, Climate and Nature By Alexandra Readhead, Anahí Wiedenbrüg, David Uzsoki October 2024 Authors/ Date

Climate Finance Framework announced at COP28, and most recently the strategy for biodiversity finance in the Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF).
For the Climate Finance Framework this is USD 1.4 billion of the total USD 2.4 billion required for climate and nature-related spending.
What overlaps, gaps and inconsistencies exist between the different frameworks for financing development, climate and nature?
There is the UNDP Integrated National Financing Framework (INFFs), the Climate Finance Framework (CFF) announced at COP28, and most recently the strategy for biodiversity finance in the Global Biodiversity Framework (GBF).
The Addis Agenda highlights the importance of fiscal measures to address climate change, leaving the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to determine the details.
While clear mandates are important, the scale and urgency of the climate and nature crises and their impact on sustainable development makes the separation between financing frameworks increasingly artificial.
FfD4 should close the gap between the development, climate, and nature finance communities, and propose mechanisms to enhance coherence between the frameworks.
These instruments have been proposed as a way to help countries deal with both climate and debt problems at the same time.
The main difference is that whereas the Bridge Proposal targets countries facing liquidity constraints, but whose debt remains sustainable (thereby complementing the Common Framework for Debt Treatment (CF)), the latter seeks to revise the CF, not only expanding it to Middle Income Countries, but also by anchoring it in a Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA), which takes climate risks and investment needs for climate and development into account.
Efforts to improve or identify new sources of international tax should not be abandoned – renegotiating tax treaties, taxing offshore indirect transfers, and new climate-related taxes on shipping or aviation – but FfD4 should insist on more time, technical assistance, and finance being allocated to strengthening domestic tax policy and tax administration.
Conclusion On process, we recommend that FfD4 take stock of the frameworks for financing development, climate and nature, to identify overlaps, gaps and inconsistencies in approaches, and bring expert communities together to develop mechanisms to promote coherence.
The rationale for the future protection measures By establishing such a protective mechanism, SIDS could ensure a cap on potential economic damages, introducing a layer of financial predictability amidst the uncertainties of climate change.
These investments would involve identifying opportunities for issuing resilience bonds, blue or green bonds aimed at funding climate resilience initiatives, while also exploring new solidarity-based resilience finance mechanisms.
By harmonising capacity-building, financial strategy, policy coherence, and stakeholder collaboration, as shown in the Theory of Change (Figure 6), the Support Service will not only protect SIDS from the immediate impacts of climate change but will also steer them towards a future defined by resilient prosperity.
These mechanisms can be customised to meet the specific needs of vulnerable developing countries, in particular LDCs, ensuring they are better equipped to respond to climate-induced, and other related shocks.
By providing a holistic support framework, DSSS would empower these vulnerable countries to navigate their unique challenges, enhancing their capacity to adapt, build resilience, and contribute to the global effort towards sustainable development and climate resilience.
Unilateral measures include climate measures such as the European Union’s (EU) Green Deal, including the Forestry Directive and the Carbon Border Adjustment Mechanism (CBAM).
Finally, the mobilization of Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) in favor of the most vulnerable countries and other new financing mechanisms (CRDCs: Climate resilient debt clauses) have marked

II.
We invite countries to join the Global Solidarity Levies TaskForce (GSL TF), which aims to identify options for international tax instruments for climate and development, build political coalitions around each of these options, and present them at COP30 in Belém with a credible timetable for implementation.
This includes climate-labelled unilateral measures, notably in trade policy, which implicitly penalise countries that are least responsible for the historical damage on the environment.
Reforms to the multilateral climate finance system must facilitate access to, particularly, non-debt instruments.
As the interplay between trade and climate policy comes into sharp focus, the trading system should facilitate Africa’s integration into the new global economy, and its pursuit of green industrialisation.
This should include effective and enforceable transparency and accountability mechanisms for climate finance reporting and its delivery.
I. OVERARCHING REFLECTIONS Amid the ongoing impacts of COVID-19, the climate crisis, geopolitical tensions, and rising inequality, the urgency for a strong global framework to finance sustainable development has never been greater.
Set up an expert technical group to develop and present to Member States options for a coherent framework that accounts for climate finance and ODA in a transparent manner.
2. Support the exploration and implementation of innovative financing instruments, such as debt- for-climate swaps, debt-for-nature swaps, and state-contingent debt instruments as a means of

d.
Strengthen frameworks like the IMF’s Debt Sustainability Analysis (DSA) and the World Bank’s Debt Management Performance Assessment (DeMPA) to address evolving risks, including climate change and economic instability.
Integrate climate risks into debt sustainability analyses and develop mechanisms like catastrophe bonds and insurance-linked securitie to address these risks while supporting climate adaptation and resilience-building efforts.
It proposes policy solutions and recommendations on two of the focus lines of this call: cross cutting issues (such as the climate transition and gender equality), and domestic resource mobilization.
Under such a framework, cross-cutting issues to be dealt with through global financing goals were determined, including the climate emergency and gender equality.
With regards to the climate emergency, one of the cross-cutting issues of the Addis Action Plan was “protecting our ecosystems for all”, determining that all the actions included under this framework should be implemented with the objective of protecting and preserving the planet, its

2 natural resources, biodiversity and the climate .
To do so, States committed themselves to “coherent policy, financing, trade and technology frameworks to protect, manage and restore (the) ecosystems, including marine and terrestrial ecosystems, and to promote their sustainable use, build resilience, reduce pollution and combat climate change, desertification and land degradation” .
Furthermore, the future United Nations Framework Convention on International Tax Cooperation also offers an additional tool from which to eventually improve climate financing effectivity, namely through the potential establishment of an additional protocol on environmental taxes or the taxation of ultra-high-net-worth individuals.
The Paris Agreement (Article 8) and Sendai Framework (Target E), encourages a comprehensive risk management approach with integrated and synergized planning between disaster risk management and climate action.
Proposals: • Establish or strengthen policy, programmatic and financing coherence between national climate change adaptation and national disaster risk reduction strategies, as well as sector-specific plans (A/RES/78/152 para 14) •
Conduct inclusive and multi-hazard disaster risk assessments that consider climate change projections to support evidence-based disaster risk reduction strategies and guide risk-informed development investments by the private and public sectors, including to support early action and recovery (A/RES/78/152 para 20)

DOMESTIC AND INTERNATIONAL PRIVATE BUSINESS AND FINANCE Further actions, including adopting and implementing regulatory frameworks, are necessary to encourage private sector engagement and investments in disaster risk reduction.
Proposals: • Collaborate with the private sector to promote resilience of businesses by integrating multi-hazard, long-term risk analysis into their management practices, to facilitate private investments in disaster risk reduction and to promote risk-informed private investments and the disclosure of disaster risk in business operations and asset values including through establishing and utilizing taxonomies and standards for financing resilience and disaster risk reduction (based on A/RES/78/152 para 49, Designing a climate resilience classification framework to facilitate investment in climate resilience through capital markets) • Encourage financial authorities to integrate disaster risk reduction into their work to promote investments in disaster risk reduction and improve disclosures on disaster risk exposure and management (based on A/RES/77/289para 33(d), Integrated National Financing Frameworks for Disaster Risk Reduction) •
The challenges we face—effects of climate change, unsustainable debt levels, high cost of capital, return to industrial policy and protectionism in developed countries, the need to achieve dual climate and digital transitions, growing inequalities and persistent conflicts—are not just isolated issues to be addressed, they are symptoms of a deeper systemic imbalance.
Debt-for-nature-swaps—a mechanism through which a portion of a nation's debt is exchanged for commitments to invest in conservation and ecological restoration—are another potential source for resource transfers, in particular if the swaps are supplemented by additional concessional financing or transfers to address climate change.
Conclusions and Recommendations (V.) Social policy and a fair fiscal contract play a key role in shifting the current development model toward social and climate justice.
which, if scaled and the revenues (either in whole or partly) allocated to climate and de-

– as currently under negotiation at the International Maritime Organisation in terms of a GHG pricing mechanism (accompanied with a GHG fuel standard) which could allocate revenues both in and out of sector.
Social protection is a recognized policy action that effectively contributes to prevent and reduce poverty and inequality, maintain the social contract, boost shared prosperity and support resilient societies, which is vital in the face of economic, compounded crises and climate challenges.
Policy alignment is a critical step to access climate financing: social protection policies should be informed by climate risks and social protection needs should be integrated into climate change and DRRM policies.
Highlight the importance of the inclusion of social protection within climate financing strategies and mechanisms.
While there has been progress toward mandating climate-related disclosures, the broader spectrum of disaster risks remains largely unaddressed in accounting and disclosure frameworks.
Policymakers could address this issue by drawing on emerging frameworks, such as the Guide for Adaptation and Resilience Finance, and the Climate Bonds Resilience Taxonomy.
Similarly, there is scope to better integrate climate finance and DRR, building on existing instruments such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF), Adaptation Fund, and Global Environment Facility (GEF).
In this context, the FFD4 Outcome document should recommend to: • Enhance DRR integration in development and humanitarian assistance and strengthen synergies with climate finance instruments .
Yet, climate and other hazard-related fiscal risks remain too often absent from national fiscal sustainability frameworks, meaning that funding for disaster response is often made after an event drawing on ad-hoc reallocations of funds, with no guarantees of enough funding being available.
Beyond the Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) formulated under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), there are specific negotiations for two sectors: air transport (with standards already adopted by ICAO) and maritime transport (currently under negotiation at the International Maritime Organization).
Attheheart ofthe framework,thereneeds tobe investment ingreenfinance, renewableenergy, andclimate resilience.
DMUNFoundation standsreadyto establishclimate financemechanismsfor youth-led organizationsandlocal communities,knowingthat youngpeople areapartofthe driverof climate solutions.
For example, AI’s potential to revolutionize climate modeling and energy transitions is immense, but its growth must be matched by the expansion of digital infrastructures, governance frameworks, and policies that address access, data privacy, and environmental impacts.
(2024) c) Science-policy advice on safe and just targets, boundaries and transformations (in follow-up to the Earth Commission’s findings), including on minimum access indicators, climate commitments, and just and inclusive energy transitions.
Promote progressive and just global tax policies: (i) tax the super-rich and reduce tax incentives for private sector and corporations that generate social, economic and environmental externalities; (ii) support the implementation of a CBDR-RC compliant taxation of major polluters' activities; (iii) strengthen international cooperation instruments and information exchanges to close tax havens, eliminate money laundering, and the loopholes that

Promote fully funded evidence-based public policies for all that are gender, age, anti-racist, disability and climate-responsive, ensuring full access to decent work, water, land, housing, food security, and universal education, health (including mental health), and social protection systems.
Domestic and international private business and finance Develop gender responsive financial instruments such as credit swaps to attract private capital to sustainable development and climate financing.
Reform the International Financial Institutions and Multilateral Development Banks governance, structure and practices to (i) mainstream human rights, environmental obligations and the SDGs in economic decision-making within their mandates; (ii) increase the availability of concessional funding, such as Special Drawing Rights allocations and innovative financing instruments - avoiding de-risking measures against public interests; and (iii) democratize decision-making governance by guaranteeing equal voice, gender parity and fair participation of the Global South and civil society representation, includi c. International development cooperation Generate additional and predictable funds, including through innovative financing mechanisms, to allow governments and civil society actions accelerate climate health and SDGs financing and maximize the e ffi ciency of existing platforms and mechanisms, such as the Green Fund, Climate Adaptation Fund, Loss and Damage Fund, the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, among others, as well as reaching, at least, the committed 0.7% ODA resources to developing countries.
Reduce the debt burden and its costs, particularly for low and middle-income countries, to address liquidity and solvency problems and free up resources to finance the implementation of the 2030 Agenda and the Climate Agenda, by a non-creditor led multilateral legal debt gender responsive framework under the auspices of the United Nations.
Emerging issues Establish a climate financing mechanism associated with international financial transactions taxes as one of the sources of new and predictable revenue to be used, inclusive to achieve the SDG 5.
4. We urge the incorporation of environmental and climate considerations in fiscal programming instruments, such as fiscal rules and national fiscal frameworks.
We welcome the policy recommendations of the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development contained in the report A/79/209 to scale-up the use of debt-swaps for Sustainable Development Goals, including for climate and nature, and calls for the development of a multilateral strategy, building on these recommendations, aiming at simplifying and improving the design, transparency and financing of debt swaps, and including concrete measures to support developing countries to overcome challenges associated with the costs of transaction, technical assistance, information-sharing, credit enhancement and risks, among others.
We encourage the consideration of the use of state-contingent debt instruments, including climate resilient debt clauses, where appropriate, to provide breathing room to countries hit by shocks with direct impact on its GDP growth prospects such as natural disasters or macro- economic shocks.
Implement the commitment undertaken by developed country parties to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) to a goal of mobilising jointly USD 100 billion annually by 2020 from all sources to address the needs of developing countries in the context of meaningful mitigation actions and transparency on implementation and to fully operationalise the Green Climate Fund through its capitalisation as soon as possible.
By 2020, substantially increase the number of cities and human settlements adopting and implementing integrated policies and plans towards inclusion, resource efficiency, mitigation and adaptation to climate change, and resilience to disasters and develop and implement holistic disaster risk management at all levels in line with the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk Reduction 2015-30.
Promote mechanisms for raising capacity for effective climate change-related planning and management in LDCs and SIDS, including focusing on women, youth and local and marginalised communities.
Additionally, 37 SIDS and 45 LDCs have submitted at least their first versions of Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs), while many countries have also begun submitting long-term strategies and adaptation communications to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC).
Green bonds remain the dominant instrument, making up 60% of total issuance, with a primary focus on climate mitigation.
Specific recommendations by the 10-Member-Group a) Science-policy advice on safe and just targets, boundaries and transformations (in follow-up to the Earth Commission’s findings), including on minimum access indicators, climate commitments, and just and inclusive energy transitions.
- It is essential to promote coordination and dialogue among the main actors of the international financial architecture and to ensure coherence, complementarity and synergy with other ongoing discussions (G20, COP, IMF/WB Annual Meetings) and global frameworks in support of sustainable development - inter alia on human rights, gender equality, biodiversity, climate change, education, health and social development - with a view to building a multilateralism adapted to the realities and challenges of the 21st century.
- Fiscal policies and public financial management instruments are powerful tools to reduce poverty and advance SDGs, including gender equality, digital transformation, environmental protection and the fight against climate change.
- FFD4 presents an opportunity to develop new instruments and mainstream existing instruments such as Climate Resilient Debt Clauses (or those relating to pandemic) to provide relief over the short term for countries facing immediate shocks and crisis, while insisting that this should not be seen as the panacea for all issues.
Such challenges include lack of access to finance for development, inefficient use of finance available through domestic and international sources, corruption in development projects and programs, inadequate mechanisms to recover and return proceeds of corruption to victim communities/ countries, lack of decentralized and locally accountable governance mechanisms to deliver development, intra- and inter-state conflicts and disasters that obstruct development or lead to de-development, climate change, structural inequalities in terms of trade between member states, and inadequate cooperation among state parties to address causes of slow progress towards achieving the development agenda.
Specific actions in this regard must include: • The IFIs and the bilateral donors must enhance funding to the developing countries and align their policies and priorities to the SDGs, urgent needs of addressing climate change related challenges, strengthening development delivery mechanisms, mainstreaming UNCAC related actions, and improving governance.
Member states must establish collaborative research, policy reform and capacity building programs for addressing common challenges faced by the humanity including climate change, natural disasters, corruption, organized crime and under- development.
Emerging Issues • Climate change has begun to significantly impede development, harm infrastructure and disrupt existing mechanisms of trade, service delivery, production and business.
The existing mechanisms are inadequate or inefficient and must be streamlined for coherent and robust climate action.
Ecosystem and biodiversity services • Collaborative Tools: Structured quests, bounties, and builds

Climate change intensifies disasters: 2023 saw $250 billion in global damages Siloed approaches hinder effective global disaster management Data fragmentation limits predictive capabilities Lack of standardized, scalable solutions for diverse regions Reactive strategies prove increasingly inadequate and costly Slow fund disbursement: Traditional financing mechanisms are often too slow to release funds based on forecasts.
Country-led platforms should serve as effective frameworks for aligning national reforms with climate and sustainable development priorities.
Promote a global financing framework based on country-led platforms that are established upon request, which align national reforms with climate and development goals, while improving access to finance and investment and addressing investment barriers.
Future policy orientation must consider providing incentives for green industries and environmentally-friendly infrastructure which can sustain long-term growth, and promote climate resilience, through investments in

renewable energy.
Climate finance provided and mobilised by developed countries, including and beyond ODA, for climate action in developing countries has nearly doubled in the last six years from USD 59 billion in 2016 to USD 116 billion in 2022 in line with the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change target to mobilise USD 100 billion per year by 2020 in developing countries.
