DRAFT AAAA paragraph Commitment Specific target or objective Matching Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) target (where available) State of implementation or progress made since 2015, using SDG or other relevant indicator (proxy) 93 Address debt sustainability challenges, No especially for least developed countries and small island developing states, including through initiatives such as the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) initiative and Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative (MDRI). References smooth transition for graduated LDCs. Target 17.4 Assist developing countries in attaining long-term debt sustainability through co- ordinated policies aimed at fostering debt financing, debt relief and debt restructuring, as appropriate, and address the external debt of HIPCs to reduce debt distress SDG indicator 17.4.1 Debt service as a proportion of exports of goods and services. In 2022, debt service in LDCs accounted for 8.4% of exports of goods, services, and primary income. This is an increase from 7.6% in 2015. (World Bank) Debt service as percentage of government revenues In 2023, developing countries' net interest payments on public debt amounted to USD 847 billion, a 26% increase over 2021. Also in 2023, a record 54 developing countries, 38% of the total, dedicated 10% or more of their government revenues to interest payments. (UNCTAD) Developing countries face significantly higher borrowing costs than do developed countries. Interest rates on sovereign debt in developing countries are 2 to 4 times higher than those in the United States and 6 to 12 times higher than those in Germany. (UNCTAD) Debt service as percentage of tax revenue The COVID-19 crisis deteriorated the fiscal positions of developing countries more than those of developed countries. Debt service now accounts for more than 20% of tax revenue in 25 developing countries. (World Bank) Debt relief provided by the HIPC and MDRI. The HIPC Initiative and the MDRI have relieved 37 participating countries of over USD 100 billion in debt since 1996. (World Bank) Percentage of official development assistance (ODA) (grants and loans) provided as concessional loans. An increasing portion of ODA is being delivered as concessional loans rather than grants. The proportion of loans in ODA to developing countries rose from 28% in 2012 to 34% in 2022. (UNCTAD) The average grant element of ODA loans to LDCs decreased from 78% in 2015 to 70% in 2021 due to both higher interest rates (from 0.35% in 2015 to 0.63% in 2021) and shorter maturity periods (from 36 years in 2015 to 27 years in 2021). (OECD) ODA allocated to debt-related actions.

DRAFT ODA resources dedicated to debt-related actions such as debt relief, swaps, and restructuring have reached a historic low, dropping from USD 4.1 billion in 2012 to only USD 300 million in 2022. (UNCTAD) Smooth transition for least developed country (LDC) graduates. Since 2015, six countries have graduated from the LDC category and an additional five are recommended for future graduation. The United Nations (UN) Committee for Development Policy (CDP) contributed to the 2024 Economic and Social Council by conducting the triennial review and monitoring of LDCs and discussing graduation in a global context. The CDP monitored the development progress, including debt sustainability challenges, of nine countries that recently graduated or are graduating from the list of LDCs, finding that in several instances natural disasters and/or oil price fluctuations have negatively impacted the debt position of graduated LDCs. (For more information see the UN Smooth Transition for LDCs website.) 94 Assist developing countries in achieving No long-term debt sustainability through co- ordinated policies on debt financing, relief, restructuring and management. Commit to supporting HIPC-eligible countries completing the process and consider initiatives for non-HIPC nations. Maintain support for countries that have already received relief and achieved sustainable debt levels. Target 17.4 (see para. 93.) Number of countries eligible for the HIPC Initiative that have benefited from debt relief. Of the 39 countries eligible for the HIPC Initiative, all 36 countries that reached the decision point have now reached the completion point. (World Bank, 2016) Initiatives of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank, in collaboration with their partners, include the Debt Management Facility, which has supported over 463 technical assistance projects across 78 countries and 20 subnational entities as of December 2022. (World Bank) Share of IMF resources allocated to capacity-development efforts Approximately one-third of the IMF's resources are allocated to capacity-development efforts, which encompass technical assistance and training programmes aimed at reinforcing debt management practices in developing nations. (World Bank) 95 Welcome IMF, World Bank and UN No efforts to strengthen debt sustainability and management tools. Use IMF-World Bank debt sustainability analysis as a valuable tool to assess appropriate borrowing levels. Urge these institutions to continue improving their tools in an inclusive process in collaboration with the UN and stakeholders. Target 17.4 (see para. 93.) The IMF has focused on several key areas to strengthen debt sustainability. In collaboration with the World Bank, for instance, it updated the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low-Income Countries in 2017. This framework helps assess the risks of debt distress in low-income countries (LICs) and guides them in managing their debt levels prudently. The updated framework incorporates more realistic stress-testing and broader macroeconomic factors. The IMF also revised its debt limits policy in 2020 to offer countries greater flexibility, allowing them to manage their debt according to their development needs while maintaining sustainability. This policy now includes tailored approaches based on country- specific circumstances and risk assessments.

DRAFT The World Bank has also undertaken several initiatives to improve debt management. For example, a cross-country comparison of Debt Management Performance Evaluations (DeMPA) shows that more than half of the assessed countries do not meet minimum standards for sound sovereign debt management practices. Key weaknesses include poor cash flow forecasting and coordination with debt management, leading to inefficient practices such as issuing new debt while holding surplus cash. Operational risk management is also a significant concern, exposing governments to potential data loss and process failures. However, improvements have been seen in aligning debt management with macroeconomic policies and enhancing legal frameworks (World Bank) Similar to the IMF, the World Bank also provides extensive technical assistance and training to strengthen countries' debt management capacities. It supports the development of medium-term debt management strategies and enhances countries' ability to manage public debt prudently. In addition, the UN plays a vital role in promoting debt sustainability through its various bodies and programmes. An example is the UN Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD) Debt Management and Financial Analysis System, which assists developing countries in managing their public debt effectively. The system further helps countries improve their capacity to record, monitor and analyse public debt data, contributing to better debt sustainability. 96 Support ongoing efforts to establish standards and promote public access to data on sovereign and external debt and encourage comprehensive quarterly debt reporting. Advocate for the creation No of a central data registry on debt restructurings and urge all governments to enhance transparency in debt management. Target 17.4 (see para. 93.) Number of International Development Association (IDA) countries with full debt data accessibility. The World Bank’s Debt Reporting Heat Map provides an assessment of how various countries report their debt data, offering insights into debt transparency globally. In 2023, 74 IDA countries reported their data compared with 76 in 2020. (World Bank) Percentage of low-income developing countries reporting sovereign debt data. About 40% of low-income developing countries did not disclose any sovereign debt data in 2020-21, and discrepancies of up to 30% of gross domestic product (GDP) were observed across various sources of public debt data. (BoC) Recent international efforts, including initiatives by the Group of Twenty (G20), IMF and Institute of International Finance (IIF), are focused on improving debt data reporting and disclosure practices. The World Bank's Debtor Reporting System and the IIF's voluntary principles for debt transparency play a crucial role in standardising and monitoring debt data, fostering accountability, and supporting sustainable economic development. (World Bank) Additionally, initiatives such as the Joint Debt Hub (OECD, IMF, World Bank Group, Bank for International Settlements) aim to enhance overall statistics on countries' external debt. 97 Enhance collaboration between debtors Yes (establish and creditors to prevent and resolve global Target 17.4 (see para 93.) To date, there are no globally agreed guidelines on sovereign borrowing for debtors and creditors. However, many piecemeal initiatives to design guidelines are in place.

DRAFT global guidelines on debtor and creditor responsibilities in sovereign borrowing and lending, building on current initiatives (such as the UNCTAD principles on responsible sovereign lending and borrowing, the IMF and World Bank's debt limits policies, and the OECD Development Assistance Committee ’s debtor and creditor responsibilities). new safeguards to enhance recipient countries' debt sustainability). Strengthen information sharing and transparency. For instance, the G20 Common Framework, developed in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, builds on the G20’s Debt Service Suspension Initiative (DSSI) to provide a structured approach to debt treatment involving both official and private creditors. The Paris Club of official creditors also has adopted principles and practices that serve as guidelines for restructuring bilateral debt. The IIF, which represents the global financial industry, has developed a set of voluntary principles – Principles for Stable Capital Flows and Fair Debt Restructuring – to guide private sector involvement in sovereign debt restructuring. Another example is the UN Basic Principles on Sovereign Debt Restructuring Processes, adopted by the UN General Assembly in September 2015 through Resolution A/RES/69/319. These principles aim to provide a framework for fair and orderly sovereign debt restructuring to ensure transparency, accountability and equitable treatment of all creditors and debtors. To date, over 130 UN member states have expressed support for these principles. However, some major economies and financial centres have not fully endorsed them, citing concerns over how these principles would interact with existing legal frameworks and financial markets. In 2012, UNCTAD introduced the Principles on Responsible Sovereign Lending and Borrowing, which are voluntary and non-binding. No country has officially endorsed the principles. In 2020, the IMF revised its debt limits policy to provide greater flexibility for countries in managing their debt according to their development needs. The revised policy takes a tailored approach, considering each country's specific circumstances and risk profile. The IMF and the World Bank also updated the Debt Sustainability Framework for Low- Income Countries in 2017, incorporating more comprehensive stress-testing and broader macroeconomic factors. The updated framework provides a more nuanced assessment of debt risks and supports responsible borrowing. ODA concessionality criteria (discount rates and thresholds). The 2014 ODA rules introduced stricter concessionality criteria than earlier guidelines, with discount rates of 9%, 7% and 6%, and thresholds of 45%, 15% and 10% that replaced the previous 10% discount rate and 25% threshold. As a result, lenders must provide more concessional loans in order for them to qualify as ODA, which particularly impacts LDCs. Additionally, these new rules included a new safeguard regarding debt sustainability in the ODA criteria. Under these provisions, loans that do not comply with the IMF debt limits p olicy and/or the World Bank’s Non -Concessional Borrowing Policy and Sustainable Development Finance Policy cannot be reported as ODA. (OECD)

DRAFT The OECD Recommendation on Sustainable Lending Practices and Officially Supported Exports Credits was adopted by the OECD Council meeting (all OECD members adhere) at ministerial level in 2018. It was revised in 2024 to update the references to the World Bank’s Sustainable Development Finance Policy. The purpose of the Recommendation is to ensure that officially supported export credits do not contribute to the build-up of unsustainable external debt in lower-income countries. To this end, the Recommendation presents practices that adherents should follow when they are considering the provision of official export credit support to public sector obligors or guarantors in such countries. 98 Emphasises the importance of debt No restructurings being timely, orderly, effective, fair and negotiated in good faith with the aim of restoring public debt sustainability and maintaining favourable access to financing. Target 17.4 (see para. 93). Reducing the time from IMF staff level agreement to delivering financial assurance from creditors for program approval under the Common Framework. Restructurings under the Common Framework have demonstrated a reduction in the delay as stakeholders acquire greater familiarity with the process. (IMF) 99 Limit the presence of sovereign bonds lacking collective action clauses. Improve co-ordination between public and private sectors and debtors and creditors to reduce moral hazards and achieve fair burden sharing in orderly debt restructurings. Recognise ongoing efforts by the IMF and the UN in this area, including the Paris Club’s No Paris Forum initiative. Target 17.4 (see para. 93). Share of Paris Club creditors to LICs In 2021, the composition of lenders to LICs had shifted significantly compared with the line-up in 1996. The share of Paris Club creditors dropped from 39% to 11%, the share of non-Paris Club creditors more than doubled to 20%, and private creditors' share also more than doubled to 19%. (World Bank) This shift indicates a rise in loans provided at market terms, complicating debt management for developing countries and restricting their access to affordable financing options. Share of developing countries’ public debt out of the global public debt Developing countries’ public debt reached USD 29 trillion, representing 30% of the global public debt in 2023. This was a significant rise from 2010, when their share was only 16% share, highlighting the rapid expansion of public debt in developing countries. Public debt in developing countries is increasing twice as fast as in developed countries. (UNCTAD) 100 Urge global action against minority No bondholders disrupting majority- supported debt restructurings. Support reforms (including pari passu and collective action clauses) to protect sovereigns from holdout creditors. Provide legal assistance to LDCs and enhance international support for advisory services, including monitoring post-restructuring creditor litigation. Encourage countries issuing bonds under foreign laws to introduce such clauses in all bond issuances. (ref to Target 17.4 n.a. (see para. 93).

DRAFT International Capital Market Association and IMF) 101 Acknowledge the rise in sovereign No bonds issued in domestic currency under national laws. Voluntarily enhance domestic legislation to reflect guiding principles for effective, timely, orderly and fair resolution of sovereign debt crises. Target 17.4 (see para. 93). EMDE sovereign bond debt EMDE sovereign bond debt reached a record high of nearly USD 12 trillion in the first quarter of 2024. (OECD) EMDE borrowing costs While EMDE borrowing costs in local currency have risen, most remain below early 2000s levels. Real yields at issuance in local currency rose from about zero to 3% between 2020-21 and the first quarter of 2024, to over 7% and 5%, respectively, for LICs and speculative-grade economies. (OECD) Recent developments in creditor countries’ domestic laws highlight an increasing commitment to safeguarding developing countries from unsustainable debt. For example, the United Kingdom government has proposed enhancements to the country’s legal framework to bolster litigation support for developing countries and has begun efforts to improve the transparency of debt held by private creditors. Likewise, there is a growing emphasis on regulating collateralised lending practices to promote fairer terms and mitigate the risk of excessive debt burdens on developing countries. (World Bank) 102 Natural disasters and other shocks can undermine sovereign debt sustainability. Notes importance that public creditors help to ease debt payments. Encourage debt rescheduling and cancellation following shocks as well as the use of new financial instruments where No n.a. appropriate. References the potential of debt-to-health and debt-to-nature swaps. The volume of debt relief provided following environmental, global health and other shocks. The G20's DSSI offered temporary relief by deferring USD 12.9 billion in debt service payments for LICs from May 2020 to December 2021 due to the COVID-19 pandemic. (World Bank) Following the DSSI, the G20 introduced the Common Framework for Debt Treatment to provide more structured debt relief. In addition, the Global Sovereign Debt Roundtable in 2023 aimed to enhance debt restructuring processes. (World Bank) In 2023, around 140 debt-for-nature swaps have been entered into. Using a methodology derived from previous international debt-reduction schemes, the International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED) estimates that debt swaps could free up to USD100 billion to restore nature and help climate change adaptation.(IIED) The Global Fund has operated the Debt2Health programme since 2007, under which ten implementing countries have entered into debt swap agreements with creditor countries, through which more than USD 226 million in cancelled debt repayments have been invested in domestic health programs (Global Fund).

DRAFT https://www.un.org/development/desa/dpad/wp-content/uploads/sites/45/CDP-excerpt-2024-3.pdf https://documents.un.org/doc/undoc/gen/n24/096/02/pdf/n2409602.pdf https://legalinstruments.oecd.org/en/instruments/OECD-LEGAL-0442