October 14, 2024 Co-Facilitators Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development Seville, Spain Dear Co-Facilitators, The Asset Leadership Network welcomes the opportunity to provide inputs to the elements paper for the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development. We understand that this Conference will determine a global financing and funding strategy for sustainable infrastructure development for many years. It is therefore imperative to include clear Asset Management requirements in order to obtain financing for sustainable infrastructure. Many nations and regional governments require Asset Management plans in order to obtain infrastructure funding and have improved accomplishment of intended outcomes with this requirement. We highly recommend this approach. As a non-profit organization, the Asset Leadership Network strongly believes that all financing for sustainable development should include requirements for Asset Management policy and plans that are driven by top executives and supported from the tactical and operational levels. We find that Asset Management driven by Treasury Departments and Chief Financial Officers are the most successful because they link infrastructure investments to mission outcomes in direct ways. Also, Treasurers and Finance Officers understand that infrastructure investments are not one-time expenditures. They require ongoing funding for operation and maintenance. Asset Management principles and practices allow the ability to plan for financial considerations throughout the entire lifecycle of infrastructure investment that serves the people it is intended for.

Management principles is a proven path to ensure measurable financial success and achievement of intended outcomes. We know of no better way to accelerate accomplishment of Infrastructure Development Sustainability Goals than to have funding be dependent on the establishment of Asset Management policies and plans. Requirements for Asset Management education, training, and implementation should be part of any infrastructure financing. Successful infrastructure investment can be achieved using established Asset Management frameworks, such as the ISO 55000 asset management system, and the UN framework “Managing Infrastructure Assets for Sustainable Development: A Handbook for Local and National Governments.” The UN Handbook and related training include references to ISO 55000 system but takes it to another level by showing how national and regional governments can leverage Asset Management. This next-level approach to implementing Asset Management best practices is highly beneficial to those involved in any infrastructure project. Establishing a culture of Asset Management around infrastructure financial investments provides paths around obstacles and constraints encountered in any project. The Mission- centric approach embedded in Asset Management helps eliminate the typical silos surrounding professions, political interests, community factions, personality issues, and more. When everyone involved in an infrastructure investment can check every action with the question, “Does this support the project mission?” many of the siloed interests can melt away. With a culture of Asset Management there is understood involvement of all relevant parties. Often, infrastructure investments are not successful because parties were not at the table early enough to warn of issues or problems that can be addressed with advanced planning. Involvement of all relevant parties provides the forum for better understanding of how to save time and money while achieving the Mission. Asset Management principles and practices require establishing an information management system. The tools and processes available today for information management are robust enough to allow secure and transparent sharing of salient information to relevant parties at the time that critical decisions need to be made. A secure and transparent information management system can help eliminate corruption and

A proper Asset Management approach also includes Risk Management, Quality Management, and other systems approaches. Asset Management provides the governance needed for a Systems-of-systems approach to be established and used to ensure successful financial outcomes, schedule adherence, project completion, handover to operations, ongoing maintenance, and realization of intended outcomes. While we recommend these approaches for financing infrastructure in developing nations, we also recommend them to all governments and all organizations around the world. The issues that Asset Management helps address are not regional, they are human. An Asset Management governance approach to any infrastructure investment provides the framework for the necessary education, training, transparency, measurements, reporting, and collaboration to ensure mission success. Including requirements for rapid deployment of Asset Management principles and practices is the best way we know to ensure the Elements Paper on Financing for Development will have the positive impact desired. Including a focus on Asset Management in the Paper will encourage the design and implementation of strategies, policies and practices at all levels of government to ensure that all public infrastructure assets are managed holistically and effectively over their entire lifespan for current and future generations. Submitted by Michael Bordenaro, Executive Director, Asset Leadership Network on behalf of our Member Organizations, Board of Directors, and ALN Senior Fellows. MBordenaro@Asset Leadership.net 1 (312) 307-3732 www.AssetLeadership.com