China’s Inputs to Element Paper of the Outcome Document of the 4th International Conference on Financing for Development 1.International developmentcooperation -We recognize that challenges and opportunities can only be properly dealt by following a people-centered approach, through strong and sustained international cooperation and development partnerships, establishment of an equal and orderly multipolar world, and dedication to universally beneficial and inclusive economic globalization. -We should foster united, equal, balanced and inclusive global development partnerships, deepening political consensus of win-win cooperation and common development,leaving nooneand nocountry behind. -We commit to strengthen North-South cooperation, South-South cooperation and triangular cooperation. South-South cooperation is a supplement to rather than a substitutefor North-South cooperation as themain channel. -We stress that developed countries should honor their Official Development Assistance commitments, provide financial, technological and capacity-building support todeveloping countries. -We support the United Nations to play a central and coordinating role in global development cooperation, support the Secretary-General of the United Nations to prioritize development, and broadly mobilize resources of the United Nations development agencies. -We should strengthen communication and coordination of international development policies, deepen synergies of development strategies and pragmatic cooperation among countries, and promote alignment in development cooperation processes at the global, regional and national levels. We should promote international organizations, business, civil society, media, think tanks and other stakeholders to participate in global development cooperation, and gather the greatest synergies fordevelopment.

strengthen their institutional capabilities and expand their operations, mobilizing additional resources for theshared development oftheirmember countries. 2.InternationalTrade -We should uphold a rule-based, non-discriminatory, open, fair, inclusive, equitable and transparent multilateral trading system, with the World Trade Organization at its core, actively build an open world economy, firmly support trade and investment liberalization and facilitation, reject unilateralism, protectionism and attempts to decouple or sever supply chains, and ensure the stable and smooth operation of global industrial and supply chains, so as to promote an open, inclusive, balanced and win-win economic globalization which benefits all. -We urge the international community to adopt urgent and effective measure to eliminate the use of unilateral economic, financial or trade measures that are inconsistent with the international law and the Charter of the United Nations that impede the full achievement of economic and social development, particularly in developing countries. 3.Debtand DebtSustainability -We should strengthen debt crisis solutions in line with the principles of collective action and fair burden sharing, with the full participation of international financial institutions and private creditors, and encourage steps to ensure comparability of treatment of sovereign and private creditors. -We should give full play to the role of multilateral development banks and other international financial institutions, and provide more development resources for developing countries. We should improve the efficiency of the use of reserve assets includingspecial drawing rights, tohelp countries in difficulty with moreliquidity. -We stress that all countries, especially major advanced economies, should adopt responsible fiscal and monetary policies, avoid negative spillover effects that will weaken developing countries’ borrowing capacity and enlarge their debt service burden and strive to create a conducive external environment for developing countries. 4.Addressing Systemic IssuesandInternational FinancialArchitectureReform -We should enhance macroeconomic policy coordination, including among UN and

-We should accelerate the reform of international financial architecture, pay high attention to the long-term structural problem of global economic governance system, enhance the voice and representation of developing countries and emerging markets in international economic decision-making, norm-setting and global economic governance, and ensure their full participation in the decision-making process of various institutions. -We stress the urgency and importance of quota share realignment of IMF to better reflect members’ relative positions in the world economy, while ensuring that no developing country is left worse off in terms of voice and shareholding. In this context, we look forward to the work to develop, by June 2025, possible approaches as a guide for further quota realignment, including through a new quota formula, underthe 17thGeneral ReviewofQuotas. -We call upon the Executive Boards of the World Bank and other multilateral development banks to ensure robust representation and voice of developing countries, includingurgently conducting theshareholding review oftheWorldBank. -We call for an open and transparent, gender-balanced, geographically representative and merit-based leadership selection in international financial institutions and call for the heads, management and staff of all international institutions to be selected based oncompetenceand equitablegeographical representation. -We encourage multilateral development banks to provide targeted financing to developing countries including longer tenor on loans, increased lending in local currency,to bettermeet thelocal development needs. -We urgently require a stronger global financial safety net, with a quota-based and adequately resourced IMF at its centre. We call upon the IMF to implement the immediate suspension of the IMF surcharges, a urgent revision of the surcharges policy and anew general allocation inSDRs. -We call for the urgent re-channeling of un-utilized SDRs of developed countries to developing countries, includingthrough MDBs. -We reiterate the need to reduce mechanistic reliance on credit-rating agency assessments, including in regulations, and to promote increased competition as well as measures to avoid conflict of interest in the provision of credit ratings in order to improvethequality ofratings and call for establishing publicrating agencies. 5.Science,Technology andInnovation

by the latest round of technological revolution and industrial transformation, and speed up efforts to harness scientific and technological achievements to boost productivity. We should strengthen cooperation on technology transfer and sharing, as well as capacity building, support the developing countries to enhance scientific and technological innovation, and jointly foster newdrivers forglobal development. -We should enhance digital connectivity, help developing countries improve their digital infrastructure and capacity, and bridge the digital divide. We should enhance international cooperation on digital industries development and digitalization of traditional industries, promote the integration of digital technology with the real economy, harness digital technology to promote poverty reduction, and conduct cooperation in emerging areas such as e-commerce forfarmers. -We should improve global governance, step up policy coordination and support UN’s central and coordination role in the scientific, technological and digital sector, and jointly create an open, fair, just, non-discriminatory international environment, so that STI and digital economy could better facilitate post-pandemic recovery and the implementationof the2030agenda. -We should promote the implementation of UN General Assembly Resolution on Enhancing International Cooperation on Capacity-Building of Artificial Intelligence (A/RES/78/311), through North-South, South-South and triangular cooperation and following the principles of sovereign equality, development-oriented, people-centred, shared benefits and inclusiveness.