Mobilising Capital for Sustainable Development A collective input paper to the 4th International Conference on Financing for Development submitted by GSG Impact and supported by 50 organisations from 45 countries. INTRODUCTION The global macroeconomic landscape has shifted significantly in recent years. Public sector debt has surged while private sector risk appetite has waned, further widening the funding gap needed to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and climate targets in emerging markets and developing economies (EMDEs). Governments face pressure to demonstrate the impact of public resources, yet public funding alone cannot close the $4 trillion annual shortfall for the SDGs, nor meet the $5.3 trillion needed for the green transition by 2030. Public and private investments must equally prioritise environmental and social impacts. Neither one can be compromised on the path to a sustainable future. The global investment industry, with approximately $240-250 trillion in assets under management, spanning public markets, private markets, and real assets, and over $30 trillion committed to ESG objectives , offers an opportunity to align capital with purpose. The challenge lies in channelling it effectively to where it is needed most. As the Addis Ababa Action Agenda states, " We encourage impact investing, which combines a return on investment with non-financial impacts ". Actions 52 and 53 of the recently signed Pact for the Future reinforce this by calling for financial architecture reform and the development of measures to track sustainable development beyond GDP. While the SDGs provide robust indicators, the Pact emphasizes advancing a broader framework for sustainability. These actions reaffirm the need to embed sustainability and impact as central objectives in financial frameworks. Collaboration with local actors and initiatives presents exponential benefits especially in managing currency risk and aligning investments with local needs. In EMDEs, currency volatility can impact long-term investment viability. By mobilising local resources and working with institutions operating in domestic currencies, such as G SG Impact’s National Partners (NPs) and Public Development Banks (PDBs), investors can mitigate these risks. It is crucial that businesses clearly communicate their needs to ensure that capital aligns with local realities. Strengthening partnerships with and ensuring the representation of local communities at decision-making levels,

makes investments more tailored to socio-economic challenges, creating resilient markets and better outcomes for climate and people. Blended finance has become critical in attracting private capital towards the SDGs, particularly in high-risk geographies. Interventions to reduce the cost of capital are needed, making investment in high-impact projects more feasible. Development Finance Institutions (DFIs) and Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) play a key role, using de-risking tools like guarantees and political risk insurance. Philanthropy, both international and local, also helps by de-risking and providing innovative solutions. Following a 10-year low in blended finance deal volume in 2022, the market rebounded in 2023, reaching a 5-year high , showing renewed momentum and the importance of scaling these efforts. Mandatory impact transparency is thus a critical lever for accelerating the effective deployment of capital towards the SDGs. To shift capital flows, investors need comprehensive, accurate, and globally comparable information on sustainability and impact-related risks and opportunities. The public sector should lead by example, reporting and disclosing the broader impacts of its activities while promoting a regulatory environment conducive to better capital allocation. Since World War II, Gross Domestic Product (GDP) has been the primary measure of progress. However, this approach has been widely challenged for not distinguishing between sectors' contributions to quality of life or sustainability, and for increasing inequality. Evidence shows that well-designed policies can stabilise climate and promote economic inclusion . It is the time for governments to move beyond GDP, incorporating wellbeing metrics into national accounts and placing impact at the centre of policy and investment. Achieving a better world requires a systemic shift — viewing impact as a "third lens" alongside risk and return. Reliable data and full transparency will enable informed decisions by investors, consumers, and policymakers. Initiatives like the release of the GEMs database and the DFI Transparency Index are steps towards more equitable capital allocation. Only through systemic reforms, data transparency, and mainstreaming blended finance, alongside strengthening partnerships with local actors who possess deep knowledge of their markets, can we ensure that investments contribute to a just and sustainable future. The time for action is now.

KEY MESSAGES 1. Empower Local Actors in Emerging Markets: Catalyse Global Impact a. Local Initiatives: Mobilise Domestic Capital for Measurable Impact Locally-led solutions are essential to achieve climate resilient economies and societies , which improve lives for all. By tailoring strategies to local contexts, these initiatives can address specific socio-economic and environmental needs more effectively. Market building organisations, such as the ones listed as signatories of this paper, work at different levels to accelerate the flow of capital towards impact. They are essential to help improve the enabling environment, the institutional infrastructure and the collective design of new solutions at scale. For instance, GSG Impact and its National Partners are working to change policies and build large pools of impact capital to improve finance for Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs) amongst others. Set up as multi- stakeholder initiatives, GSG’s National Partners (NPs) play a critical role in driving market transformations according to highest priority barriers to be addressed to boost the flow of capital towards high-impact projects. The value of such local initiatives should be increasingly recognized in sustainable development and impact finance. SMEs are the backbone of economies, driving both employment and climate resilience, highlighting the role of the real economy for sustainable development. Yet, access to finance remains their biggest challenge. NPs are therefore designing several financial vehicles expected by 2025 in Ghana, Nigeria, and Zambia to strengthen local intermediaries, such as venture capital and private equity funds, which invest in scalable and impactful SMEs. These efforts aim to leverage private capital, strengthen domestic financial ecosystems, and enhance the capacity of local financial institutions, driving sustainable development, quality jobs and resilience. The Ci-Gaba Fund-of-Funds in Ghana, a $75 million blended finance vehicle structured with two tiers of capital, aims to mobilise 70% of its funding from local pension funds into SDG-aligned SMEs. In Nigeria, the Wholesale Impact Investment Fund (WIIF) targets a $100 million first close, with 50% capital from the Federal Government and 50% from private investors, notably from domestic pension funds. It will support SMEs in sectors like agriculture, education, health, energy, and climate, with a gender focus.

In Zambia, GSG Impact’s National Partner and the Bank of Zambia (BoZ) are developing the Small Business Growth Initiative (SBGI), offering low-cost credit to SMEs, especially in agriculture, which will be capitalised with an initial injection of $180 million from the Central Bank. Through capital relief and loss protection via a BoZ guarantee mechanism, the initiative will help de-risk investments and enable local banks to expand their loan portfolios. Local pension funds are expected to invest in the fund’ s equity at later stages. By mobilising local pension funds, these three initiatives manage currency risk, keeping capital in local currencies and reducing FX volatility. The advantages of locally driven initiatives like those of GSG Impact’s National Partners (NPs) are numerous. Local actors can better identify viable projects and solutions, manage risks, advocate for reforms in regulations, and foster collaboration among stakeholders like investors, philanthropy, and governments. In sum, global stakeholders can amplify and scale successful local models, ensuring national initiatives receive the funding needed for sustainable development in emerging markets. We must advocate for market builders to secure more grant support, given their broad impact and effectiveness. b. Scale Private Investment Through Blended Finance Blended finance, a mechanism that uses public or philanthropic capital to de-risk investments and attract private capital, is critical for scaling investments in high-impact sectors. Despite growing interest in sustainable investing, private investors often hesitate to invest in emerging markets due to real or perceived risks. Blended finance can address this by offering credit enhancements, or other forms of de-risking, including first-loss guarantees, subordinated returns, currency hedging and other risk-sharing tools. Blended finance bridges the public and private sectors, where Public Development Banks (PDBs) should serve as key partners to mobilise private capital, but too rarely do so. PDBs should be encouraged to step-up, use the tools already at their disposal, and ensure that private funds reach high-impact projects. By offering concessional finance or taking on more risk, PDBs could reduce the costs for private investors and enhance project viability. For instance, initiatives by the European Investment Bank (EIB) and the Brazilian Development Bank (BNDES) have successfully combined public and private resources for renewable energy, infrastructure, and social development. Despite their capacity to deploy de-risking instruments, many PDBs lack experience in co-investing with private investors to support national development strategies. Strengthening collaboration with PDBs in EMDEs can boost domestic private capital mobilisation, especially for SME finance, due to their local market expertise and strong stakeholder relationships.

Blended finance is crucial for scaling private investment in sectors like infrastructure and SMEs, particularly in high-risk, low-income geographies. While donor governments have supported private investment through concessional finance, the grant-equivalent amounts remain small despite their effectiveness in attracting private capital. For instance, instruments like the IDA PSW focus on capital preservation with a limited fiscal impact compared to subsidies to numerous sectors in developed countries. Scaling blended finance can help overcome many barriers in attracting private capital to riskier regions , especially when combined with targeted interventions like technical assistance and capacity building to strengthen local financial institutions, business development service providers and investee companies. However, to improve effectiveness, and make the best use of finite amounts of concessional capital, blended finance models must become streamlined and demand-driven to ensure truly transformational and sustainable impacts. For instance, they could focus on targeting high-impact sectors or geographies, particularly where the financing gaps are greatest. Currently, many models prioritise investments in upper-middle-income countries, leaving low-income regions underserved. Or if their objective is private capital mobilisation, they should then aim for significantly higher multiples of capital mobilised. To address these gaps, instruments like guarantees, capped returns on equity funds, concessional loans, and risk insurance are critical. These de-risking mechanisms can improve the risk-return profile for investors, but more focus should be on making them accessible to local actors in emerging markets to enhance their effectiveness. One key example of effective blended finance is the Private Infrastructure Development Group (PIDG) which has leveraged $1.9 billion of official development assistance (ODA) into $25 billion of private capital for infrastructure projects in Africa and Asia . Another is FMO´s SDG Loan Fund, which will mobilise $1.1 billion of investor capital for SDG-aligned loans. The UAE’s ALTÉRRA fund recently anchored the Catalytic Transition Fund (CTF), with a capped return on its cornerstone commitment, and an initial close of $2.4 billion attracting additional sovereign and private sector institutional capital for climate solutions in emerging markets. Replicating such initiatives or scaling up existing instruments that have proven successful, such as the Global Infrastructure Facility, PIDG, or MIGA, could further strengthen efforts to mobilise private capital for sustainable development projects. Catalytic capital also plays a crucial role in scaling blended finance , addressing financing gaps, generating new pipelines, and supporting local capacity building. In fact it is a more comprehensive approach to address the systemic barriers to moving more capital to finance the SDGs. Expanding these approaches can increase private investment in high-risk, high-impact sectors.

To ensure blended finance's effectiveness at scale, DFIs and PDBs must enhance their use of de- risking mechanisms, local currency offerings and adopt portfolio-level approaches to reduce transaction costs. However, many deals are too bespoke and time-consuming, limiting replicability and scalability. It is crucial to explore new, more standardised blended finance models that can be replicated across different contexts, enabling greater private capital flows into key sectors. 2. Better leverage public finance for development - DFIs can multiply private capital flows to SDGs a. Transform DFIs’ Mobilisation Ratios and Impact Through Increased Collaboration The strongly recommended shift from "originate to hold" to "originate to share" model marks a crucial evolution in how MDBs and DFIs mobilise private capital . Traditionally, they retained loans and investments on their balance sheets, limiting their ability to scale financing to meet the SDGs. In fact, current mobilisation ratios remain low, with less than $1 of private capital mobilised per dollar invested . However, a more collaborative approach is being tested by a few pioneering MDBs and DFIs, like IDB Invest's large infrastructure projects in Latin America or collaborations like the Africa Resilience Investment Accelerator (ARIA). Another notable example is the IFC’s Managed Co -Lending Portfolio Program (MCPP) which has raised over $10 billion from private investors by offering a standardised co-financing approach, demonstrating how DFIs can effectively collaborate with private sector players. The "originate to share" model enables DFIs to attract private investors by transferring portions of risk, expanding lending capacity through co-financing deals and creating products like syndicated loans and guarantees. While this shift fosters collaboration, it also presents challenges. This model works best for investments aligned with private investors' appetites and there is a risk that DFIs may focus on more developed markets and lower-risk sectors, favouring larger projects with lower impact. Reviewing internal incentives will be necessary for DFIs, as they often favour speed of deployment over impact . DFIs and their internal KPIs must become more strategic and sophisticated in how they balance risk management with development goals, ensuring shared assets attract private investors while prioritising high-impact projects in riskier markets. To achieve this, DFIs should increase the blending of concessional finance with guarantees and first- loss mechanisms to make investments viable where private capital hesitates.

Another challenge is the scarcity of investable opportunities for larger investors. Developing or bundling investments through Fund of Funds models, often supported by concessional finance, is essential for scalability. Building frameworks and regulatory environments that support this shift is also crucial. By adopting the "originate to share" model, MDBs and DFIs unlock larger volumes of private capital, ultimately closing the substantial financing gap needed to achieve global development goals. b. Scale de-risking mechanisms such as guarantees using catalytic capital The need for de-risking mechanisms, such as guarantees, first-loss mechanisms, risk insurance and concessional loans, is critical for mobilising private capital in EMDEs. These tools address the risk-return imbalance that often deters private investors from assets like infrastructure, SMEs, and renewable energy. Guarantees can allow the transfer risks to help attract capital to high-impact sectors. For example, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) has used guarantees and a liquidity facility to partner with local banks in Turkey, enabling low-interest local currency loans for high-impact projects . Such initiatives create favourable conditions for private sector participation. Catalytic capital further supports this process by combining public, private, and philanthropic funds, enhancing the appeal of investments, especially in low-income regions . This capital is crucial in blended finance, helping unlock private investment for development projects. Donors, DFIs, MDBs, PDBs, and philanthropies can enhance their impact by increasing their collaborations and by creating regional pools of catalytic capital that attract institutional investments, allowing for risk diversification and greater investment scale . In sum, expanding de-risking tools is vital for increasing private sector investment in sustainable development. Collaboration between MDBs, DFIs, PDBs, local financial institutions and market builders in EMDEs is key to deploying these instruments at scale, making investments more viable for private investors.

3. Drive systemic change through impact transparency: mandatory impact accounting for a sustainable future The necessary shift in resources to achieve the SDGs and the Paris Agreement goals requires the world to move towards a global economic system where impact on sustainable development is put at the heart of decision-making in investment, business and government activities alike. For this, “full impact transparency” , underpinned by the availability of complete, comparable, and reliable sustainability and impact-related information of all economic activities, must be recognized as a key lever for systemic change . Investors, consumers, citizens and other key market players (including those who hold investors to account) need accurate, reliable, and globally comparable information on sustainability and impact-related risks to make informed decisions. Yet, over the past 10-15 years, impact-related data has not been consistently measured or reported, limiting its value in markets. For impact transparency to unlock its full potential as a key lever for driving a meaningful shift in capital flows, mandatory accounting for impact by all stakeholders is critical. Relying solely on voluntary sustainability disclosures has proved to be insufficient to instigate the necessary behavioural change, in capital markets and among governments, to effectively mobilise resources at the scale and the pace required to fulfil the global commitments. Fortunately, there are positive trends. First, regulators and governments increasingly recognize the need for better sustainability information. Second, shifting social values among consumers and investors are influencing businesses to adopt sustainable practices. Lastly, huge leaps in digital technology now enable better measurement and reporting of social and environmental impact. Recent progress by the IFRS Foundation’s International Sustainability Standards Board (ISSB) in developing a global baseline for reporting sustainability-related financial risks and opportunities marks a pivotal step toward the harmonisation and convergence of sustainability disclosure standards (SDS). While the initial proliferation of sustainability disclosure guidelines resulted in a fragmented and often confusing landscape, the ISSB’s baseline has introduced a more streamlined and consistent reporting framework, providing a common language that builds a much-needed bridge between the worlds of mainstream finance and sustainable development. Alongside this, efforts by other leading standard setters, such as the European Sustainability Reporting Standards adopted by the EU in July 2023, coupled with the progress in countries developing national standards aligned or interoperable with the ISSB’s framework, represent significant strides toward a near future in which sustainability-related disclosures are mandated across jurisdictions worldwide. Nevertheless, advancing towards the goal of “full impact transparency” requires building over the global reporting baseline in order to include disclosures on impacts that go beyond those affecting

impacts on people and the planet that may not directly affect a company’s value creation or erosion in the short term must also be effectively managed and disclosed to ensure that we adopt a long term perspective aligned with sustainability objectives and that the information needs of a broad range of stakeholders are met. The memorandum of understanding signed by ISSB and the Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) is an important step towards providing a seamless, global and comprehensive sustainability reporting system for companies looking to meet the information needs of both investors and a broader range of stakeholders. Currently, the scope of sustainability disclosure standards being mandated worldwide, with the exception of the European Sustainability Reporting Standards and a few others, remains largely confined to information regarding sustainability-related risks and opportunities that could affect entities’ financial performance. These standards have also prioritised climate -related disclosures over social-related ones. Governments should push for disclosures that address both social and environmental impacts, including those that do not directly affect financial performance but contribute to challenges like climate change and inequality. Challenges around the global adoption of sustainability disclosures should not be overlooked, especially those faced by EMDE jurisdictions and particularly by micro, small and medium-sized enterprises (MSMEs) that are part of regional and/or global supply chains through their links with larger reporting entities. It’s crucial to involve EMDE stakeholders in designing standards and build capacity to prepare entities for new reporting requirements. Inclusivity and tailored capacity- building are essential to make impact transparency effective for all. This movement towards greater impact transparency, that will ultimately catalyse systemic change, requires dual action by governments and public sector institutions worldwide. This should start by issuing regulation mandating sustainability disclosures by corporates and investors in their markets, while contributing to prepare market players, especially MSMEs, to respond to evolving sustainability requirements; and secondly by spearheading the movement and opening up data to the public about the real impact of their publicly funded activities and operations on people and the environment. For years, there have been calls for policymakers and national statistical offices to move beyond Gross Domestic Product (GDP) as the sole measure of national progress . GDP provides a narrow perspective of the complex interplay between economic outcomes, wellbeing, and sustainability. In response, governments may strive toward greater impact transparency by measuring and reporting the broader positive and negative impacts of their activities and the contributions of the overall economy to sustainable development . The Social Progress Index and the OECD Better Life Index provide well-established international frameworks for measuring national progress beyond economic statistics. Additionally, recent efforts by the International Public Sector Accounting Standards Board (IPSASB), in collaboration with the World Bank, to develop the first climate-related disclosure standards for the public sector also mark a significant

step in this direction. Fundamentally a new integrated accounting and reporting system is required, which will be the basis for corporate and public sector reporting and national accounts. Moreover, to contribute to wider system change, governments could play a key role by establishing policies and legal frameworks that allow investors to have a more nuanced statement of the type of returns that they seek, and to require any information that is relevant to those objectives. This would entail re-thinking the definition and norms around fiduciary duty to account for environmental, social, and governance factors, allowing investors and other stakeholders to adopt a holistic approach to their responsibilities and goals. The imperative for greater impact transparency in private and public sector accounting beckons us toward a transformative era of convergence. This journey will reshape the landscape of finance and governance , placing impact at the core of decision making. Although there is still a long road ahead, the outstanding progress made over the past five years in the field of sustainability disclosures and impact accounting, especially through the work of the International Foundation for Valuing Impacts, is encouraging. Momentum should not be lost. As we progress towards 2030, efforts pointing towards the mandatory adoption of sustainability disclosures by all entities, should be complemented by a call for all market participants to actively engage in effective impact management, based on globally applicable management system standards and guidance, such as the ISO/UNDP PAS 53002 and the future ISO/UNDP WD 53001, and progressively implement impact accounting as a means to integrate sustainability reports and financial statements. Stressing the urgency to fulfil a shared vision of full impact transparency and management, and advancing towards it is key to responding to the challenges of our time.

RECOMMENDATIONS AND CALL TO ACTION FOR GOVERNMENTS AND FFD4 STAKEHOLDERS: 1. Support and invest in domestic initiatives: Provide grants to fund market development, including for capacity building and technical assistance for local business development to increase the pipeline of impactful, investable projects. Provide concessional funds to invest in early-stage businesses and domestic impact funds. Support the design and structure of new financial products for high-need geographies, with measurable impact targets. Reduce regulatory barriers for investments in low- and middle-income countries. 2. Expand De-Risking Tools: Establish flexible catalytic capital facilities able to operate with scale and in diverse geographies (for instance by repurposing small percentages of ODA). Boost the availability of partial guarantees, first-loss capital, and subsidised financing with ambitious targets for mobilising private capital (targeting capital mobilisation ratios that will fill the SDG & climate finance gaps). Prioritize local currency solutions. Track and report the effectiveness of de-risking tools through clear financial and impact metrics. Cooperate with credit rating agencies on their ability to rate structured financial vehicles to clarify risk, leading to a more efficient allocation of capital. 3. Foster greater impact transparency: a) issue regulation to mandate sustainability disclosures by both public and private entities, ensuring that all stakeholders are accountable for their impacts on people and the planet, while contributing to build capacity in those markets actors that are less prepared to respond to such requirements (i.e., MSMEs), and b) replace GDP as a sole measure of performance by incorporating and prioritising notions of wellbeing and impact goals such as the SDGs in public sector accounting and reporting.

Appendices Annex 1 About GSG Impact GSG Impact, active in over 50 countries, works to progress the transformation of global financial systems, so that every investment, business and government spending decision takes into account impact, as well as risk and return. The GSG Impact Partnership is a growing community of National Partners and Strategic Partners dedicated to advancing impact locally and globally. GSG Impact supports the development and work of the National Partners. We harness our collective voice to advocate for impact globally, and advance impact through innovation, knowledge sharing, convening and collaboration. For more information: www.gsgimpact.org. This input paper was written by GSG Impact with contributions from the following organisations, which lend their support to its content and recommendations: a. GSG Impact’s Strategic Partners (by alphabetical order): 2X Global: A global industry body and standard setter for gender lens investing, convening the full spectrum of investors, capital providers, and intermediaries working across global markets. 2X engages their global network through a series of activities that advance intersectional investment agendas, scale the field, shift mindsets, and facilitate capital deployment. African Venture Philanthropy Alliance (AVPA): A Pan-African network dedicated to increasing the flow of capital into social investments across Africa, ensuring effective deployment for maximum impact. AVPN: As Asia’s largest social investment network with 600+ members, AVPN is an ecosystem builder that works to increase the flow of capital towards impact in Asia and ensure that resources are most effectively deployed. B Lab Global and Sistema B: B Lab is the nonprofit network transforming the global economy to benefit all people, communities, and the planet. Sistema B is a non-profit organization that believes that governments, civil society organizations, social movements, citizens and businesses ’ social responsibility, all together, are not enough to solve our current social and environmental

The Collaborative for Frontier Finance (CFF) is a multi-stakeholder initiative that aims to increase access to capital for small and growing businesses in emerging markets. The International Foundation for Valuing Impacts (IFVI) is an independent nonprofit bridging the gap between financial accounting and impact measurement, with a mission to build and scale the practice of impact accounting to promote decision-making based on risk, return, and impact. Impact Europe (formerly EVPA) is the investing for impact network in Europe. We gather capital providers along the full continuum of capital (foundations, impact funds, banks and financial institutions, corporate impact actors, public funders) to increase prosperity and social progress for all, fix inequalities and injustices and preserve the planet. Together, we rally people, capital and knowledge to accelerate, scale and safeguard impact. Latimpacto: A network of capital providers focused on increasing the flow of human, intellectual, and financial capital for impactful investments in Latin America and the Caribbean. It has grown to include over 210 members across 16 countries, partnering with Impact Europe, AVPN in Asia, and AVPA in Africa, uniting over 1,100 members globally. Publish what you fund: An advocacy organisation focused on improving transparency in aid and development finance. It ensures data on aid flows is accessible and usable, supporting effective decision-making through tools like the Aid Transparency Index. Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors: Rockefeller Philanthropy Advisors (RPA) accelerates philanthropy in pursuit of a just world. Continuing the Rockefeller family’s legacy of thoughtful, effective philanthropy, RPA is a global nonprofit that remains at the forefront of philanthropic growth and innovation, with a diverse team of experienced grantmakers with significant depth of knowledge across the spectrum of issue areas. Founded in 2002, RPA has grown into one of the world’s largest philanthropic service organizations and has facilitated mor e than $4 billion in grantmaking to more than 70 countries. Social Value International (SVI) : A global network dedicated to social impact and value. Its members work towards changing how society accounts for value, promoting better practices in social impact measurement. b. GSG Impact’s National Partners Argentina NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Argentina) Impact Investing Australia (GSG Impact National Partner in Australia)

Impact Finance Belgium (GSG Impact National Partner in Belgium) Aliança pelos Investimentos de Impacto (GSG Impact National Partner in Brazil) Canada NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Canada) Plataforma de Inversión de Impacto Centroamericana (GSG Impact National Partner in Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, Nicaragua and Panama) Cam-NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Cambodia) Inversión de Impacto (GSG Impact National Partner in Chile) The International Forum for China Impact Investing, IFCII (GSG Impact National Partner in China) Catalizando la Inversion de Impacto (GSG Impact National Partner in Colombia) Finland NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Finland) FAIR (host of the GSG Impact National Partner in France) Bundesinitiative Impact Investing (GSG Impact National Partner in Germany) Impact Investing Ghana (GSG Impact National Partner in Ghana) Hellenic Impact Investing Network (GSG Impact National Partner in Greece) India Impact Investors Council (GSG Impact National Partner in India) The Israeli Forum for Impact Economy (GSG Impact National Partner in Israel) Social Impact Agenda per l'Italia (GSG Impact National Partner in Italy) NAB Japan (GSG Impact National Partner in Japan) Impact Investing Kenya (GSG Impact National Partner in Kenya) Malaysia Impact Alliance (GSG Impact National Partner in Malaysia) Alianza por la Inversion de Impacto Mexico (GSG Impact National Partner in Mexico) Netherlands Advisory Board (GSG Impact National Partner in Netherlands)

Impact Investors Foundation (GSG Impact National Partner in Nigeria) NorNAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Norway) Aliados de Impacto (GSG Impact National Partner in Peru) Maze Portugal (host of the GSG Impact National Partner in Portugal) Impact Investing South Africa (GSG Impact National Partner in South Africa) NAB South Korea (GSG Impact National Partner in South Korea) Spain NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Spain) Lanka Impact Investing Network (GSG Impact National Partner in Sri Lanka) Swedish NAB (GSG Impact National Partner in Sweden) Thailand Investing for Impact (GSG Impact National Partner in Thailand) EYDK (GSG Impact National Partner in Türkiye) Impact Investing Institute (GSG Impact National Partner in the United Kingdom) The US Impact Investing Alliance (GSG Impact National Partner in the United States) Zambia NABII (GSG Impact National Partner in Zambia) Annex 2 - Key resources: ITF (2021). Time to Deliver: Mobilising Private Capital at Scale for People and Planet. Available at: https://www.impact-taskforce.com/media/gq5j445w/time-to-deliver-final.pdf ITF (2021). Mobilising institutional capital towards the SDGs and a Just Transition. Available at: https://www.impact-taskforce.com/media/xe5dsend/workstream-bfull-report.pdf GSG (2023). Time to Accelerate: Capital Mobilisation for the SDGs in Emerging Markets. Available at: https://www.gsgimpact.org/resources/publications-and-reports/time-to- accelerate-capital-mobilisation-for-the-sdgs-in-emerging-markets/ ITF (2023). State of Play 2023 . Available at: https://www.impact- taskforce.com/media/uhhevie5/itf-report2023.pdf

CGD (2023). Taking Stock of MDB and DFI Innovations for Mobilizing Private Capital for Development. Available at: Taking Stock of MDB and DFI Innovations for Mobilizing Private Capital for Development | Center For Global Development (cgdev.org) GSG (2024). Impact Transparency: From the Ground Up. Available at: https://www.gsgimpact.org/resources/publications-and-reports/impact-transparency-from- the-ground-up/ Convergence (2024). State of Blended Finance 2024: Spring Update. Available at: State of Blended Finance 2024, blended finance, state of blended finance - Convergence Resources | Convergence