Using Special Drawing Rights as a Source of Financing for Sustainable Development Input for the UNDESA Elements Paper on Financing for Development Action area: International development cooperation By Yabibal Walle and Kathrin Berensmann (yabibal.walle@idos-research.de; kathrin.berensmannn@idos-research.de) German Institute of Development and Sustainability (IDOS), Bonn, Germany October 15, 2024 In the context of multiple crises, the availability of development finance for developing countries is diminishing, even as their financing needs to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals are rising. Special Drawing Rights (SDRs) of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) were mentioned only once in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, in the context of the IMF's role as a global safety net and the fact that the IMF's five-yearly review of SDRs was due that year. But since 2021, SDRs have emerged as a crucial source of development finance and a vital instrument of international development cooperation. There are three key developments that illustrate this new trend. 1. First, the allocation of USD 650 billion in SDRs in 2021 was instrumental in helping developing countries to cushion the negative impact of the COVID-19 pandemic. Unfortunately, low-income countries received only a very small percentage, 3.2 per cent, of the total allocations. This is because the allocation of SDRs is based on quota shares in the IMF, which reflect a country's relative weight in the world economy and its share in world trade. But, even these allocations provided a lifeline to developing countries at a critical time. 2. Second, we have witnessed substantial channeling of SDRs to developing countries. Recognizing that most of the 2021 SDR allocations went to rich countries that did not need them, the G-20 pledged to donate USD 100 billion in SDRs to low-

however, has been how to channel the SDRs to developing countries for achieving maximum impact. So far, these donations have been channeled through the IMF's two trust funds, the Poverty Reduction and Growth Trust (PRGT) and the Resilience and Sustainability Trust (RST). These two trusts have provided critical financing at concessional rates. Since 2020, approximately $56 billion has been channeled to the PRGT, which has the potential to mobilize $40 billion in interest-free loans for low- income countries by 2024. On the other hand, 23 RST partners have collectively channeled approximately $48 billion in SDRs to the RST, which is anticipated to facilitate the provision of an estimated $29 billion in affordable financing for the period 2022-2025 (IMF 2024b). 3. Thirdly, the debate surrounding the utilization of SDRs to enhance the financial capabilities of multilateral development banks (MDBs) has reached a pivotal point. The channeling of SDRs to MDBs offers a significant advantage over the channeling to the IMF's trust funds (Berensmann et al. 2024). Firstly, MDBs can leverage channeled SDRs up to three to six times, depending on the MDB in question. This is in sharp contrast to the leverage ratio of the IMF's trusts, which is less than one. Secondly, MDBs possess unparalleled regional expertise when working with their clients, thereby positioning them as the optimal institutions to facilitate the integration of long-term funding with technical assistance, policy dialogue, and advisory services. Thirdly, the channeling of SDRs through MDBs, in contrast to the PRGT and RST, does not necessitate the mobilization of supplementary financial resources on the part of the donors. The African Development Bank (AfDB) and the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) have proposed a hybrid capital mechanism to allow the channeling of SDRs to MDBs in a way that preserves the reserve status of SDRs. In May 2024 the IMF approved the use of SDRs to purchase hybrid capital instruments issues by prescribed holders (IMF 2024a), yet the two MDBs are currently facing challenges in securing the minimum of five contributing countries required to make this mechanism operational (Berensmann et al., 2024). Nevertheless, it is evident that the allocation of SDRs represents a viable strategy for enhancing the financial capabilities of the MDBs. This is particularly crucial in the context of the challenges associated with increasing shareholder capital, including the reduction of development budgets in several donor countries and the frequent disputes over quota shares and voting rights that often accompany capital increases.

As these three developments make SDRs an important instrument for development finance, and as they are likely to remain so in the coming years , the Outcome Document of the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development (FfD4) should include a specific paragraph on SDRs. In particular, there should be calls for action in three areas. 1. The IMF should aim for new SDR allocations. The 2021 allocations are already four years old and the world is suffering from the polycrisis of climate change, wars and debt crises. One key advantage of SDR allocations is that they do not place an additional burden on national budgets of donor countries. This is not a donation from any country, but a creation of the international financial system. Furthermore, they do not exacerbate the debt burden of developing countries, as these countries would only be required to pay SDR interest rates (also only if they convert their SDRs to other currencies), and would not need to repay the SDR amount used. 2. Donors should continue to support the PRGT and RST as they have proven to be crucial for low-income and vulnerable developing countries. The Pact for the Future has called for eligible countries to donate half of their SDR allocations to developing countries in 2021 (UN, 2024). The FfD4 should also reiterate this call and emphasize the important role of PRGT and RST. 3. The channeling of SDRs to MDBs must be enabled, as this is arguably the most effective and efficient way to use donated SDRs. The channeling of SDRs is also probably the cheapest and most feasible way to substantially increase the MDBs' financing capacity. It is well known that MDBs provide concessional, long-term financing for sustainable development and provide counter-cyclical lending to complement national resources in the event of financial and economic shocks, natural disasters and pandemics. The FfD4 should therefore call for concrete steps to realize this potential. In particular, it should call on countries with little legal restrictions –such as China, Japan, and the UK - to contribute to the AfDB-IDB mechanism to make SDR channeling to MDBs a reality. Furthermore, FfD4 should request that the European Central Bank (ECB) lift its prohibition on channeling European SDRs to MDBs. This prohibition is currently impeding the participation of several potential contributors to this mechanism, including France and Spain, which have been active supporters of this mechanism from its inception. There are sound reasons for the ECB to repeal the current (though still informal) prohibition on the channeling of SDRs to MDBs (Berensmann et al., 2024). The FFD4 should also extend an invitation to other MDBs

In conclusion, while promoting the wider use of SDRs to finance sustainable development, it is vital to acknowledge the inherent limitations in terms of scope and time. Firstly, it is important to note that general SDR allocations cannot occur frequently. There are necessary intervals for thorough review, debate, and decision-making, which must be respected. Secondly, the capacity of vehicles like PRGT and RST is limited by several factors, including the need for external funding to offer concessionary financing to vulnerable countries. Thirdly, there are limits to the amount of SDRs that can be allocated to MDBs. Currently, the IMF has set the limit at 15 billion USD to maintain the reserve asset status of SDRs (IMF 2024a). Significant SDR-based hybrid capital may also jeopardize MDBs' AAA rating if its share outweighs paid- in capital. Despite this, the potential of SDRs remains significantly underutilized. Therefore, we are proposing that the Outcome Document of the FfD4 recognize the growing importance of SDRs as a source of development finance and call for actions to deploy them strategically and effectively. References Berensmann, K., Walle, Y., Dufief, E., Esteves, P., Floyd, R., & Ye, Y. (2024) Channeling Special Drawing Rights to Multilateral Development Banks: Overcoming Remaining Legal and Political Obstacles, IDOS Policy Brief (30/2024), Bonn: German Institute of Development and Sustainability (IDOS). Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.23661/ipb30.2024 IMF (International Monetary Fund) (2024a). Use of SDRs in the acquisition of hybrid capital instruments of the prescribed holders (IMF Policy Paper No. 2024/026). Retrieved from https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/Policy-Papers/Issues/2024/05/15/Use-of-SDRs-in-the- Acquisition-of-Hybrid-Capital-Instruments-of-the-Prescribed-Holders-549003 IMF (2024b). SDR channeling. Retrieved from https://www.imf.org/en/Topics/special- drawing-right#SDR%20Channeling UN (United Nations) (2024). Pact for the Future, Global Digital Compact, and Declaration on Future Generations. New York, NY: United Nations. Retrieved from https://www.un.org/sites/un2.un.org/files/sotf-the-pact-for-the-future.pdf