Financing for Development – Input by Global Citizen SpecialDrawingRights(SDRs): The $650B issuance ofSpecialDrawingRights(SDRs)bytheIMFin2021wasahistoricmove.As most SDRs go to wealthy nations, the G20 commitment to reallocate at least $100B to poorer countries. This wasoneofthebiggestcommitmentsbytheG20inthelastfewyearsandithasn’t been met yet. While $108B have been pledged to bereallocated,mostofthesepledgeshaven’t been transferred to the IMF funds ($40BB in March 2024), the PRGT and the RST, yet, let alone reached countries (around $10B). Another issue not yet addressed is that the IMF doesn’t have thecapacitytorechannel100B$inSDRs ,atbestitscapacitystandsat$60B. At the same time, SDRs remain a formidable way of increasing the pool of funding available for the green energy transition and the pandemic preparedness and potentially also other issues such as the fight against hunger. If more channelstousetheSDRscanbeunlocked, muchmore than $100B could be redirected to countries in need . Many countries haven’t yet pledged to reallocate SDRs despite their capacity to do so,orhaveonlypledgedalittleamount,shortofthe 50%Spaincommittedtodo. It is important to continue to make progress on the SDRs - to show that the Global North walks the talk, but alsotofullyunlocktheirpotential.HundredsofSDRsarestilluntappedwhilewelack billionsandtrillionstofundthegreentransitionandthefightagainstpovertyandhunger. TheFfD4processcouldmakeadifferencein: ● Spearheading new ways ofusingSDRsandmaximizingtheirimpact :thiscouldbedone through an Independent Expert Group commissioned as partoftheFfD4process.Please see a proposal for draft Terms of Referenceintheannex;wecanalsoprovidemoreinput onpotentialexpertsandhowtosupportsuchagroup. ● Ensuring that the new mechanism of the African Development Bank (AfDB) can start working, paving the way for other MDBs to set up similar mechanisms. Back in May, the IMF board approved the use of SDRs for hybrid capital by the board. This now pavesfor the way for 5 countries to make commitments in SDRs (Japan for instance)andothersto back up the mechanism through callable guarantees (the Liquidity Support Agreements, so far France has already committed to this).Themechanismcouldbeupandrunningby Sevillawhichwouldbeahistoricmove. Debt:

pause clauses (natural disaster resilience clauses, NDRC) which would help to prevent future debt crises while providing immediate support for countries facing a major external shock such asanaturaldisaster. Debt pause clauses are a great means to quickly free funding in case of an external shock. In 2020, it first needed a G20 decision to agree on the DSSI (debt service suspension initiative)to help poorer countries addresstheimmediateimpactsofCOVID.Suchaninitiativewouldbecome obsolete if debt clauses (which are NPV neutral) are generalized.Sofar,onlytheUK,France,the US, the World Bank, the Inter American Bank (IAB), the AfDB, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (EBRD) and the European Investment Bank (EIB) have announced implementing those clauses and only for natural disasters and for a limited set of countries (SIDS). Other MDBs but also major bilateral creditors like the German KfW haven’t joined yet. While initial progress wasmadeonthisissueinParisattheFinancingSummitinJune, no process has been put in place to make further progress. At best, these clauses should be generalized across creditors and become a real tool in the fight against the debt crisis and in increasingtheresilienceofpoorandvulnerablecountriesinthefaceofclimatechange. As part of the FfD4process,theinternationalcommunitycouldagreetoincludetheseclausesby defaultinanynewloanagreements: ● This should include all relevant bilateral development banks and development finance institutions, credit export agencies, and all MDBs, but also include a call on private creditors. ● These pause clauses should apply to external shocks such as natural disasters (tropical storms, earthquakes), endemics and famines. In order to define the triggers inawaythat is reassuring for capital markets, a second condition could apply: the external shock (objectivelymeasured)andanestimatedimpactofatleast10%onGDP. ● Theyshouldbeofferedfreeofcostorataverylowrate(.5%)toallLICsandSIDS. ● Theyshouldapplytonewloansandexistingones,followingtheWorldBankexample. Fossilfuelsubsidies: Since 2009, the G20 has committed to phasing out inefficient fossil fuel subsidies; in 2016, the G7 gave itself 2025 as a deadline. Yet subsidies are far from being phased out. In 2022, total subsidies for oil,gasandcoalreached$1.529T,whichisalmostdoublewhattheworldspendson educationandsignificantlyhighercomparedtosubsidiesbackin2010. Action on this is possible: in 2014, Indonesia introduced major reforms, removing subsidies to gasoline. The fuel subsidy amount went from 1.81% to 0.31% of GDP in 2015. The reforms positively provided much needed fiscal space forsocialassistanceprogrammesforthepoorand

contains too many loopholes. Ahead of COP28 in 2023, the European Parliament called for an end to all direct and indirect fossil fuel subsidies at national, EU and global levels ‘as soon as possible and by 2025 at the latest’. The Netherlands launched an initiative at COP28 to join forceswithothercountriesandphaseoutfossilfuelsubsidies. As part of the FfD4 process, the international communityshouldensurethatfossilfuelphaseout plans are included in national plans in line with the Paris Agreement (including as countries update their Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs) due in 2025). Governments should strategically align saved public expenditure toward global goods on climate action and development.Fullpricereformcouldraiserevenuesof$4.4T,3.6%ofglobalGDP,in2030. Levies: In addition to other financing flows, levies or taxes on sectors or individuals which pollute over average (and/ or benefit from globalization while being undertaxed) should start playing an increasinglyimportantrole.Suchso-calledsolidaritylevieswillbetheonlymeansintheshortand medium term to massively increase grant financing to the poorest countries (over debt-based financing) to help them fight extreme poverty andclimatechange.Theyarealsoanimperativein thefightagainstclimatechangeandformoretaxjustice. The FfD4 outcome document should clearly state the needtodevelopasetofsolidaritytaxesto be approved globally and whose proceeds should be used entirely to fund global public goods and development at home and abroad. While the objective should beforeverycountrytoadopt and implement such levies, progress shouldn’t be function of a global agreement. At the FfD4 summit, a number of countries, a coalition of the willing, should agree to move ahead in implementing atleastonelevy,ideallyintheframeworkoftheGlobalSolidarityLeviesTaskForce (GSLTF).. This can be a new levy or a top up to an existing levy, depending on the specific situation of each country. Implementation and collection of the tax revenue would happen at national level but an international agreement should define how the proceeds should be allocated and tracked in a transparent way. The FfD4 levy coalition should grow in numbers by COP30andtarget2026forimplementationofthelevy/levies. The most promising levies in terms of revenue collection and feasibility at this stage include levies on: financial transactions; air traffic (kerosene, tickets or airports);maritimetransport;fossil fuelsextraction;billionaires/ultrarichindividuals. OfficialDevelopmentAssistance:

exacerbating the situation of the failinginternationalaidarchitecture.Forthisreason,thePactfor the Future decided to “scale up and fulfill our respective official development assistance commitments, including [...] the goal of 0.7 per cent of gross national income for official development assistance and 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of gross national income for official developmentassistancetoleastdevelopedcountries.” FfD4 provides a crucial opportunity to call on governments to live up to that decision and put action behind words, which have been reiterated in the Addis Ababa Action Agenda almost 10 years ago, stating that “the fulfillment of all ODA commitments remains crucial”. Also the FfD4 process could clarify IDRC as anexceptionaliteminODAreporting,whichwereneverenvisaged tobeamajorcomponentofODAandshouldideallybeexcludedfromODAreporting. Transparencyandtrackingofclimatefinance,ofspecifictargetsforclimateadaptation Clarity, transparency, and accountability of climate finance are key, especially considering the lessons learned from the lack of clearly agreed metrics in the $100B target for international climate finance. Both contributorsandrecipientsmustplayacrucialroleintrackingcommitments anddisbursementsonclimatefinancetoensureglobaltargets-particularlyonclimateadaptation -aremet. This presents an opportunity for FfD4 to ensure contributors have their contributions more effectively recognised. Improved data quality would also facilitate the involvement of theprivate sectorandotherorganizationstosupporttheachievementoftheParisgoals. As part of FfD, parties should agree on regular transparency reports submitted to the OECD, starting from 2025, regarding the support provided, mobilized, needed andreceivedandforthe OECD to report disaggregated amounts. With regards to reportingclimatefinanceviaMDBs,itis important to ensure finance does not contribute to financing fossil fuel projects, directly or indirectly.

ExpertPaneltoMaximisetheUseofSDRsfordevelopmentandclimate The G20 and other advanced countries have made commendable progress against their collective commitment to recycle $100 billion SDRs.Sofar,atleast$87billionhasbeenpledged, in the absence of an authorization from the US Congress. The IMF has been the only SDRs prescribed holder tohavebenefitedfromSDRreallocationefforts;howeverithasalmostreached its fundraising targets, set at about $60 billion SDRs (for both the PRGT and the RST). To date, there is noformalcommitmenttorechanneltheadditional$40billionwhichhasbeencommitted. In order to fully realize the G20 commitment, other rechanneling options will have to be unlocked. As SDRs prescribed holders, Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) appear to be the most fruitful channel for immediate recycling, with the added advantage that SDRs used in hybrid capital arrangements can leverage even further lending. The African Development Bank (AfDB) and Inter-American Development Bank’s (IDB) hybrid capital proposal has been vetted by IMF staff, and has been judged to preserve the important reserve asset characteristic of SDRs. This proposal paves the way for similar proposals from other MDBs, multiplying the impact of SDRs whichotherwiseremainidle. However, European Central Bank regulations restrict eurozone member countries from lending reserve assets, including SDRs, to any institution other than the IMF. Other countries have cited complex technical hurdles which preventthemfromrechannelingthroughothermeans.Wehave reachedastalemate. While the immediate need is to mobilize the SDRs pledged under the G20commitment,thereis unlocked potential in the large pool of SDRs on advanced country balance sheets. They represent a largely dormant asset that could beusedinafinanciallyresponsiblewaytoleverage financial support for thetransitiontoasustainableeconomy.ButtoactualizetheG20pledgeand unlock the power of SDRs, more options are needed. We need countries to work together to devisetechnicalsolutionswhichmeetthepoliticalambition. We propose that the FfD4 summit announces a new Expert Panel to Maximise the Impact of SDRs,whichwouldagreesolutionstounblockadditionalrechannelingoptionsby2026. TermsofreferenceforWorkingGroup: ● MandatedbyFfD4 ● SupportedbyIMFandBIS ● Composed of independent experts, researchers and academics on SDRs, development

ThreeareasofWork ➔ Liftconstraintsoncurrentlyproposedrecyclingmechanisms throughMDBs(specifically, thehybridcapitalmodelandtheSDRbond) Whatarethemainconstraintsandhowtoaddressthem? ● Financialconstraintsonthedonorside ● Technicalconstraintsonthecentralbankdonorside ● Financial/legalconstraintsontheMDBside ● RemainingconstraintsfromtheIMFside ● Politicalconstraints,includingbothlegislativeandgovernmentalpolicy ● AnalyzeinflationaryriskslinkedtoSDRs ➔ NewproposalstorecycleSDRs ArethereotherwaystorecycleSDRs? ● AsliquiditylinesforMDBs ● Through other prescribed holders such as IFAD to make progress in the fightagainstfoodinsecurity ● SustainableFutureBonds(MarquesandGallagher) ● Bilateralorregionalrecycling ● Tosupportdebtrelief ➔ Reservemanagement Are there other ways to mobilize global reserves to the benefit of vulnerabledeveloping countries? ◆ Extendingswaplines ◆ RethinkingIMFemergencylines ◆ RethinkingcentralbankpurchasesofMDBbonds ◆ usingreservestowardsgreenorsocialbondsorasguarantees ◆ ReformofSDRtomakeitaglobal“currency”