To the Co-facilitators of the FfD4 Outcome Document Re: Call for inputs to the FfD4 Elements Paper 15 October 2024 Excellencies, We are writing to you in our capacity as representatives of the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) Technical Committee 251 (TC251) in response to your call for inputs to the FfD4 Elements Paper. ISO is the premier global industry consensus-based standard setting body, comprised of 172 member countries, and responsible for over 25,000 international standards aimed at promoting the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) of the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. ISO and the UN have formal arrangements for collaboration and liaison with one another to further the achievement of the SDGs. Our particular committee, TC251, focused on Asset Management, currently represents the collective views of the appointed National Standards Bodies in 58 UN member states. We firmly believe that the next International Conference on Financing for Development provides a historic opportunity to put the overdue call for better public sector policies and practices for sustainable public infrastructure asset management at the forefront of the global agenda. This letter contains a summary of our proposed recommendations for forthcoming conference. With over 70-85% of infrastructure costs occurring after the acquisition or construction phase of an asset, infrastructure asset management is not only a sustainable development issue but also a development finance issue and must therefore be embedded in the UN’s Financing for Development Agenda. Much of the current development finance debate is focusing on generating trillions of dollars for constructing new infrastructure. These discussions remain crucial. However, too little attention is directed towards putting in place leading practice strategies, policies and practices to manage, maintain and fund new and existing public infrastructure assets over their entire lifespan. The lack of such policies and practices continues to result in devastating failures of aging infrastructure assets across the globe, severely hampering progress on sustainable development. We can now see examples of both catastrophic failures and slow decline. We foresee this worsening as climate change tests the resilience of public infrastructure. Better asset management is especially important for infrastructure assets, especially those that provide the basis for all essential public services, such as roads, water and sanitation systems, electricity grids, waste management, as well as education and health facilities. In August 2024 ISO published a new guidance standard (ISO 55011:2024) to identify ways in which government and non-government bodies can act and interact to improve public policy and asset management, in support of sustainable development. This standard was approved internationally after a multi-year consensus building process with content developed and led by a topic-specific working group (ISO/TC251/WG7) comprised of internationally recognised content and policy experts.