Policy Brief October 2024 | No.01 Input for UN Finance for Development Elements Paper: Fostering a Global Public Development Bank Ecosystem for Sustainable Development and Climate Action 1 Key takeaways • The world’s 530 public development banks (PDBs) with over US$23 trillion in assets can foster a new global financial ecosystem. • UN Member States should call on their PDBs to foster a global PDB ecosystem. • Policy-based public-public collaborations can meaningfully advance green and just transitions at the pace, scale, and on the terms required. Preface The international financial architecture has not mobilized the long-term, low-cost, and stable finance needed to facilitate green and just transitions, to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), or to fulfill the Paris Agreement (UN 2023). The world’s national development banks (NDBs) and multilateral development banks (MDBs) can provide the foundation of a global public financial ecosystem for delivering global public goods and development in ways that systematically work to achieve the SDGs and climate adaptation, mitigation, and biodiversity goals more cheaply, more rapidly, and on the United Nations Member States at FfD4 in Spain should call on public national development banks (NDBs) and multilateral development banks (MDBs) to foster a global public development bank ecosystem grounded in accountable public-public collaborations. This call to action reflects United Nations (UN) Finance for Development priorities. UN Secretary-General António Guterres has called for ‘concrete steps that global leaders can take right now’ for additional investments in sustainable development and climate action (UN IATF 2024, iii). UN Secretary General Guterres further emphasizes that the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development (FfD4) in Spain in 2025 will be an opportunity ‘to galvanize political will, create momentum, and set ambitious benchmarks for action’. Therein, financing for development is understood as a transformative resource for a better future, but something that itself must be transformed and made fit for purpose. Member States have tasked FfD4 in Seville, Spain to not only assess progress in FfD outcomes and on the 2015 Addis identifying actions and initiatives that can help to accelerate implementation of the 2030 Agenda and to support reform of the international financial architecture. In response, the UN FfD4 July 2024 Ababa Action Agenda. Member States Call for Inputs for an Elements Paper on Financing for Development asks: “What are the key financing policy reforms and solutions that the fourth International Conference on Financing for Development should deliver?” The following Element Input Submission provides a forward-looking, actionable, and evidence-informed recommendation: foster an intentional global public development bank (PDB) ecosystem to confront the finance for development challenge as a matter of public policy. The Finance in Common Summit reports that the world’s 530 PDBs have over

US$23 trillion in assets. The PDBs can be the foundation of a new global financial ecosystem. PDBs are key, but PDBs are also not the full extent of total global public banking capacity. All public banks, including public development, commercial/ retail, and universal banks, number over 900 and have combined assets of US$55 trillion. Member States can call on the world’s public banks to function as a global ecosystem, beginning with the PDBs. Behind the call is the reality that since the Addis Ababa Action Agenda there is no viable pathway to financing global green and just transitions that will not pass through the world’s public development banks. These PDBs already exist at the multilateral, regional, national, and subnational scales. Yet these powerful financial entities have been functioning too much in silos and too little in collaboration. Change is needed. The recommendation to foster a global PDB ecosystem responds to national, regional, and global calls for more coordinated and appropriate public financing for development. It does so by intentionally mobilizing already existing PDB institutions to work together to provide sustainable development financing at the pace, scale, and on the terms needed for green transitions that are socially equitable. This can then be further scaled up to encompass all public banks. The Need for a Global Public Development Bank Ecosystem for Development and Climate Action According to the United Nations (UN), the international financial architecture has been ‘unable to support the mobilization of stable and long-term financing at scale for investments needed to combat the climate crisis and achieve the Sustainable Development Goals’ (SDGs) (UN 2023). This has resulted in a persistent and growing SDG investment gap worldwide that, according to the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), is about to reach $4 trillion annually in developing countries alone. Around $30 trillion in investment is needed over the next eight years globally. The world is simply not on track to meet SDG ambitions. There are two reasons for this collective failure to finance green transitions that are socially just. First , an over-reliance on and the under-performance of private investors to deliver green and just development and climate finance at the pace, scale, or on terms required to meet the SDGs. Second , an under-appreciation for and the under-utilization of existing public financial institution capacity. Over-reliance on and under-performance of private investors Strategies for financing the 2030 SDGs and development have tended to over- rely on private investors as the solution to the challenges. This over-reliance stems from calls made in the 2015 Financing for Development Addis Ababa Action Agenda (AAAA) and, more significantly, from the World Bank’s Billions to Trillions agenda that disproportionately advocate for market-based and private-sector led development and climate solutions. Despite the confidence placed in them, private investors have under-performed and demonstrated an unwillingness to meet climate investment or sustainable impact demonstration requirements. Table 1 provides Climate Policy Initiative data on tracked global climate finance from 2017 to 2022. In 2022, private investors accounted for $463 billion, or 32.7 per cent, of total climate finance. By contrast, public institutions accounted for $730 billion, or 51.6 per cent. Yet global private financial institutions and investors hold over 80 per cent of the over $340 trillion in total global financial assets (public and private); public institutions hold less than 20 per cent. While private commercial institutions have meaningfully increased climate finance since 2017, private investors collectively under-invested despite having more than four times the financial capacity of public institutions. Moreover, private climate finance is highly concentrated in only the most profitable and safest investments in

Table 1. Global Climate Finance by Household, Private, and Public Sources. Billions USD$ Source 2022 2021 2020 2019 2018 2017 Household/Individuals 222 147 59 51 65 41 Private Investors 463 418 274 252 215 227 Commercial Financial Institutions 247 223 128 116 50 46 Corporations 203 182 132 118 147 165 Funds 7 5 3 8 10 6 Institutional investors 5 7 5 3 8 8 Unknown 1 0.3 7 7 - 2 Public Institutions 730 549 332 337 261 340 Bilateral Development 38 27 25 23 26 18 Financial Institutions Export Credit Agency 2 2 1 1 3 2 Government 106 93 30 35 35 30 Multilateral Climate Funds 2 4 4 4 3 3 Multilateral Development 104 82 75 62 58 56 Financial Institutions National Development 268 209 130 160 94 174 Financial Institutions Public Funds 0.1 0.3 2 2 2 2 State-owned Enterprises 133 88 13 12 23 26 State-owned Financial Institutions 77 44 52 38 18 30 Total 1,415 1,114 664 639 540 608 Private investors have also tended not to demonstrate sustainable investment impacts on the terms appropriate to socially just and equitable green transitions, particularly in the global south and within marginalized communities (Eurodad 2018). This is because private investors and corporations have little choice but to maximize profits due to management’s fiduciary duties to shareholders (TNI 2023). Verifiable climate action, socially just transitions, and equitable development are secondary concerns. This structural limitation to market-based approaches is pronounced in World Bank support for the blending and de-risking of private investment with public money, including via public- aggravating already unsustainable debt situations (Eurodad 2022). Private investors can have a role in development and climate finance. But public alternatives that can prioritize equitable development and socio-environmental climate concerns are leading the charge – even as more needs to be done to demonstrate positive development impacts for all people, impacts that are also verifiably green and just. private partnerships (PPPs), which use Under-appreciated and under-utilized global public financial capacity Global public financial institution capacity has been under-appreciated within development and climate finance These public development banks, which include the world’s multilateral development banks (MDBs) and national development banks (NDBs), can together form the foundation of a powerful new global public financial ecosystem. There is potential to expand a global public development bank ecosystem, initially fostered by the NDBs and MDBs, to form a truly comprehensive pro-public global public financial ecosystem. By combining the public development banks with the world’s public retail, universal and postal banks there are 914 public banks with combined assets of $55 trillion (based on discussions until very recently. Only in 2024 BankFocus data) (Marois and Güngen 2024). Furthermore, pulling together these

It is not simply that in collaboration public banks can provide more financing. Public banks can together better support socially just and demonstrably sustainable development projects than in isolation (Steinfort and Kishimoto 2019). Public- public collaboration can effectively internalize the interdependence of climate action with sustainable and equitable development as a matter of policy priority. Adaptation, mitigation, and biodiversity goals can be better achieved through intentional, coordinated, and impact- oriented public investments. So the ambition is not simply more financing, but more collaborative financing that demonstrates verifiably positive impacts for people and the planet – everywhere – and does so as a matter of policy. There is growing awareness of the current under-utilization of public development bank capacity to finance the 2030 SDGs. A 2023 G20 Expert Group recommends strengthening the MDBs to support the 2030 SDGs to help end extreme poverty, boost shared prosperity, and contribute to global public goods. New research papers on MDB and NDB climate finance relationships show promise in existing collaborations but underscore that little is known, more research needs to be done, and policy efforts need to be made to enhance MDB and NDB collaboration (Marois, Stewart, and Marodon 2023; CPI/ E3G 2023). Both the quantity and quality of climate financing need improvement to ensure public finance fosters sustainable, equitable, and green development. Recommendation: NDBs and MDBs Foster a Global Public Financial Ecosystem UN Member States at FfD4 in Spain should call on public national development banks (NDBs) and multilateral development banks (MDBs) to foster a global public development bank ecosystem grounded in accountable public-public collaborations. transitions and equitable development as a matter of public policy. This is a viable recommendation because NDBs and MDBs already have the financial capacity, institutional resources, and developmental expertise needed to begin fostering this public financial ecosystem (Marois, Stewart, and Marodon 2023; Volz 2024). The parts are available. What is missing are the explicit mandates to foster a new global ecosystem of public-public financial collaboration for the global public good. UN Members States can make this change. While public banking financial capacity What does a global public development bank financial ecosystem for equitable development and just climate action, founded on NDB and MDB collaboration, look like? regeneration and energy, transport, health, and educational infrastructure – all of which need to be climate resilient. In response to the Covid-19 pandemic MDBs supported NDBs to deliver financing to micro-, small-, and medium- sized enterprises (MSMEs), water, and public healthcare providers. NDB and MDB collaborations already exist, if at the relative margins of global finance. More must be done to bend public- public collaborations to green and just development transitions (Marois, Stewart, and Marodon 2023; CPI/E3G 2023). An intentional global ecosystem of NDB and MDB collaboration that formalizes and builds out from existing promising practices can offer cheaper financing on terms more appropriate to delivering more rapid green and just transitions while respecting a rights-based approach to development. A new global PDB ecosystem would Research on municipal infrastructure build from both the SDGs and the Paris financing shows that public bank loans Agreement on climate change and can be less costly, easier to access, and finance. Several, if hardly all, public NDBs on better terms than private sector loans and MDBs have already made clear, (Steinfort and Kishimoto 2019). MDBs can and sometimes binding, climate action help to bring down the domestic cost of commitments. Across Europe, most NDBs capital by making use of their strong credit and MDBs have begun reporting on SDG- ratings (Volz 2024). As a matter of policy, aligned financing. The Nordic Investment public banks can adjust the terms of loans Bank has a climate policy banning future to help advance shared climate policy, investments in carbonizing energy. More just transition, and equitable development than sixty public development banks have objectives (Marois 2021). formed the FiCS Water Finance Coalition in support of SDG6 Water for All. Globally, regional MDBs have provided some direct financing to NDBs to support municipal

A global PDB ecosystem can offer cheaper financing because it need not be profit- driven. Profit-driven private sources of development and climate finance drive up the cost of capital due to shareholders’ financial return expectations. By making global development and climate finance policy-driven rather than profit-driven, this finance becomes cheaper and more affordable. Finally, a global ecosystem of NDBs and MDBs can be a pillar for democratic, accountable, and transparent development and climate action. This is not because NDBs and MDBs are inherently better or worse institutions than private banks (Marois 2022). There are negative instances of MDB collaborations with governments and NDBs that have enabled business as usual in ways that have circumvented effective decarbonization (Güngen 2023). Such counter-productive relationships must and can change. The underlying point is that public development banks are financial institutions owned by public authorities. As such, these institutions have the potential to be held accountable and be run according to democratic norms where and when society commands it. Promising democratic norms already exist among public banks, if unevenly so (Marois 2021). A global PDB ecosystem can draw from positive models of MDB and NDB governance. Representative forums, the German KfW and the Costa Rican Banco Popular y de Desarrollo Comunal, which integrate differing but broad-based forms of civil society representation in the governing Boards. Finding the right forum for governing a new global PDB financial ecosystem in ways that can transparently demonstrate positive development alongside green and just climate impacts requires experimentation. There are current promising public examples to build on. Member States can call on existing public development banks to begin working together and to do so in pro-public ways. This can be achieved through mandate and investment policy changes at the national level and by pushing for support from the MDBs at the multilateral level. A global PDB financial ecosystem carries the potential to strengthen NDBs in the global South, respecting their development pathways without compromising the need for a green and just transition. There is evidence that financing for development that is grounded in mutually supportive networks of development finance institutions, government actors, and community stakeholders is more efficient and socially sustainable (Ray, Gallagher, and Sanborn 2020). with Boards composed of Ministers or Scenario of outcomes: The Pitfalls and Prospect of Public-Public Collaboration for Development and Climate Action Pitfall? Public Development Banks have no capacity to form an ecosystem The world’s MDBs and NDBs have not yet been tasked to form an ecosystem delivering global public goods and, therefore, these institutions have not developed the capacity to do so. Notwithstanding, over the last four years the Finance in Common Summit (FiCS) has created a global forum that has helped to awaken public banks to their global and national responsibilities. Three messages have emerged from the FiCS. One, the implementation of the Paris Agreement, the pursuit of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), and the imperative of green and just transitions for people and the planet are one and the same goal. Two, governments already have in their hands over 530 public development banks, which serve as financing channels for development and climate projects in all sectors. Three, these PDBs can join forces and assume critical responsibility for financing just transitions at scale. To add to this, once formed, the new PDB ecosystem of national and multilateral development banks can be extended to incorporate all public banks, commercial and universal. To ensure sustainability and accountability, a new Governance Forum needs crafting to democratically hold the global public financial ecosystem accountable. The

Pitfall? Reduced climate investment or crowding out of private finance Conventional economic thinking into public banks, including from the World Bank, has raised concerns over public banks leading to reduced investments or economic growth and, relatedly, to the crowding out of private finance. This earlier conventional work correlating public banks to weaker economic performance has lost forcefulness as new research evidence no such correlation. Moreover, conventional research never accounted for the urgent need to accelerate the pace of investment and improve the quality of financing in response to global development and climate ambitions and just transitions. Rather than focusing on hypothetical crowding out, public policy needs to focus on the crowding in of impact-oriented and patient public finance. This pathway must be guided by democratic, transparent, and accountable public purposes towards just development and climate action. Pitfall? Capture or corruption of public development and climate finance Conventional economic thinking also points to what is perceived to be the inherent inefficiencies and corruption of public institutions, regardless of their governance frameworks. The sticky bias towards perceived private sector efficiency and superior innovativeness has privileged finance policies enabling private actors over public ones in development and climate finance. The evidence of inherent public bank inefficiency and corruption, however, is overstated. New research shows that public banks are only as good and as effective as society makes them to be – yet accountable, effective, and efficient public banks can be (Marois 2022). To be sure, society must remain vigilant about governing public banks, including through a new global ecosystem Governance Forum. Prospect! A global public development bank ecosystem fit for development and climate action and MDBs to work together to begin making better use of their collective financial capacity, expertise, and global reach to lead global development and climate action. Collaboration between public banks can provide development and climate finance at the pace, scale, and on terms appropriate for positive development and green and just transitions. The tools and mechanisms are already in place, including everything from providing loans, guarantees, grants, technical assistance, project preparation, and equity investments (Marois, Stewart, and Marodon 2023; CPI 2023). At the same time, accountability and democratic governance can be bolstered. If Member States of the UN call for it, the world’s public MDBs and NDBs can be the foundational catalysts behind a new, intentional, and accountable global public financial ecosystem for delivering global public goods, including effective development and climate action. This prospect can be structurally more efficient and viable than indirect enticements for private investors, costly PPP/blending commitments, and non- binding global private finance commitments to align with the 2030 SDGs and Paris Agreement (for example, the basically scuppered GFANZ). The failure of NDBs and MDBs to foster a global ecosystem will see Member States and policymakers continue to struggle to realise meaningful development and climate finance commitments and to demonstrate meaningful impacts on sustainable development and just transitions. The future of just development and climate finance can and should be public. The idea is simple, but the prospect