11 October 2024 GPEDC Inputs to the FfD4 Elements Paper Background This input responds to the call by FfD4 co-facilitators to identify key policy reforms and solutions that the FfD4 conference should deliver and make concrete proposals on how to strengthen the follow-up process to ensure accountability and implement agreed commitment (cf. instructions here). GPEDC Co-Chairs pre- pared the input, with support by the GPEDC Joint Support Team (hosted by the OECD and UNDP respec- tively) and invited Steering Committee members to share reflections or inputs by 4 October 2024. Mem- bers were encouraged to consult across their constituencies (see Annex 1 of the Terms of References) in order to get feedback, raise awareness and generate buy-in to the ideas brought forward, as well as reflect key messages in their own or other group submissions to the input paper to reaffirm their support. Inputs were received by a wide range of stakeholders. This final document is shared by GPEDC Co-Chairs on behalf of the Steering Committee as a joint GPEDC input by 15 October 2024. The document I. A global financing framework (including cross-cutting issues) The chapeau text in the first section of the FfD4 outcome document, should state the need to comple- ment the commitments on ‘quantity’ (mobilising resources) with those on ‘quality’ and impact , build- ing on the below paragraphs. This would also frame references to effectiveness across chapters/ac- tion areas of the document. Development Effectiveness is an essential pathway to drive sustainable development. A more systematic focus on the benefits of development effectiveness, and addressing the bottlenecks, trade-offs and conundrums to help accelerate progress on the 2030 Agenda and SDGs is essential to reinstate trust, increase financing for development and achieve long-term positive impacts. • The development effectiveness agenda is a forward and solution-oriented agenda basing con- crete actions on empirical evidence and lessons emanating at country level, and feeding into policy making and commitments at the global level. • Development effectiveness commitments are essential for all types of financing for sustainable development , and should be applied, tracked and honoured to fill the SDG financing gap and guide the (post-)2030 development agenda. Other, related efforts, for instance, allocation of existing fi- nancial resources and providing targeted support where most needed are equally essential. • The agreed development co-operation effectiveness principles – country ownership, focus on results, inclusive development partnerships, and transparency and accountability to each other:

11 October 2024 o Hold true and increase in relevance as development co-operation increasingly mobilises dif- ferent types of finance from a growing number of development partners and partnerships . When put into practice, the principles can help deliver resources in line with country priorities, including through impactful partnerships and inclusive dialogue open to all development ac- tors, including non-executive entities such as the private sector, parliamentarians, civil society organizations, trade unions, philanthropy and local and regional governments. o Are tried and tested. The principles build on decades of experience of what works and what does not and promote a change in culture towards testing new ways of doing development which, in turn, holds promise to instill much needed trust between development actors. o Are more than ever relevant to call for inclusive, locally- and country-led development poli- cies, partnerships and practices , and better coordination among diverse partners, to reduce transaction costs and burden on partner countries, to enhance country systems, and to re- spond better to the growing calls and needs by people and the planet. • Greater progress – through political leadership and capacity building – to applying the effective- ness principles in their entirety is an essential pathway to enhance delivery on SDG commitments, notably SDG 17 to address the financing gap and shape future development priorities as it points to true bottlenecks, hindrances and conundrums around areas where progress is lacking . Together with the principles guiding South-South Co-operation as well as Triangular Co-operation as comple- mentary approaches to address global development challenges, they incentivize improved and ac- celerated delivery of the SDGs. • The Global Partnership for Effective Development Co-operation (GPEDC) drives stakeholders to- wards building impactful partnerships for the SDGs by helping them to implement and track pro- gress around the four principles , with the understanding that the principles are applied differently across countries at various stages of development and among different types of public, private and civil society stakeholders involved. The ongoing GPEDC global monitoring round will bring new evi- dence into the discussions on effectiveness including the process leading up to FfD4. • Effective development cooperation, through improved delivery and strengthened partnerships for sustainable development driven by developing countries, must once again become a central focus of development financing discussions. Clarity on the incentives to drive development effec- tiveness is critical to help address global challenges in a changing financing landscape across multi- ple levels of governance and communities. A focus on nationally-owned sustainable development strategies, using ODA strategically, mobilizing additional private resources, and effective partner- ships will all be essential to put the world on track toward the successful implementation of the 2030 Agenda. II. Action areas a. Domestic public resources • Strengthening the effectiveness – in particular country ownership, mutual accountability, and transparency in the use of public resources – can help mobilize more domestic public re- sources in financing the 2030 Agenda. • Using and strengthening country systems in line with agreed commitments , incl. national sta- tistical systems, to encourage a more effective use of domestic (and international) resources

11 October 2024 • Deepening, extending and operationalizing the democratic ownership of development poli- cies and processes is key to deliver lasting results and impact by leaving no one behind. • Reversing the trend of shrinking civic space wherever it is taking place, is paramount for build- ing a positive environment for sustainable development, peaceful societies, accountable gov- ernance and for the achievement of the 2030 agenda and the SDGs. b. Domestic and international private business and finance • Improving the effectiveness, accountability, and transparency of development finance can help attract more private investments, which is a priority for partner countries. We welcome the call to place greater focus on development impact, rather than on quantity or degree of leverage alone, including by ways to improve partnerships with the private sector, at the 2024 FfD Forum . • Formulating and implementing guidance on effective partnering with the private sector will amplify the effort to mobilise private finance – essential for closing the SDG financing gap . Engagement with the domestic and international private sector requires greater understand- ing of the policies and dialogue, the quality of engagement and ease of partneri ng needed t o work with multinationals, domestic firms and MSMEs as well as financial actors and experts in line with international standards to harness their full potential. Effective engagement with pri- vate sector stakeholders can help to access finance to, among other things, deliver income generation opportunities and decent jobs for all, while making business profits. Effective pub- lic-private dialogue at country level, initiated by governments and involving external partners, is key to define shared agendas and improve partnerships and the policy environment for sus- tainable development outcomes. The Kampala Principles for Effective Private Sector Engage- ment provide relevant guidance for all partners and the Kampala Principles Assessment (KPA) is providing evidence to focus on relevant shared priorities for action for countries that under- take it as part of the GPEDC Global Monitoring round. • To optimize aid delivery, including through a continued focus on untying aid is key to enhance the effectiveness of private sector engagement in development by allowing developing coun- tries more flexibility in procurement or otherwise enable more locally-led entities to success- fully compete for development co-operation resources. c. International development cooperation [MAIN PRIORITY SECTION FOR GPEDC] • Respective ODA commitments, including for 0.7% of donor GNI to ODA must be met, with 0.15 to 0.20 per cent of GNI for the least-developed countries. • Effectiveness challenges have amplified since the Addis Ababa Conference of 2015. Country ownership considerations remain central and are, at times, complex. This can include difficult trade-offs with whole-of-society approaches, challenges in the use of country systems and re- lated capacity constraints, and bottlenecks in identifying, engaging and targeting the furthest

11 October 2024 behind, including in fragile contexts. Country Ownership also relates to calls for greater rep- resentation of developing countries in related processes. Proliferation and fragmentation of the aid system jeopardise effectiveness, quality and impact. This was already acknowledged in the AAAA and at BAPA+40, but with progress on the SDGs and their financing lagging, working in principled ways in complex settings requires greater attention to these bottlenecks. • The FfD4 outcome document should therefore : 1. CLEARLY REAFFIRM THE SCOPE AND OBJECTIVES OF DEVELOPMENT EFFECTIVENESS: Reiter- ate that the scope of the development co-operation effectiveness principles applies to all types of development co-operation, linking to other FfD sections/action areas that require updating. This includes multilateral effectiveness (MDBs and UN System), empowering the countries of the global south, private sector engagement, aligning climate finance with country needs, multi-stakeholder partnerships, locally-led development and disaster risk reduction, potentially also issues related to trade, debt, taxation, governance. 2. REAFFIRM PRINCIPLES AND UPDATE COMMITMENTS: • Reiterate the validity, integrity and continued relevance of the shared development co- operation effectiveness principles – Country Ownership, Focus on Results, Inclusive Partnerships and Mutual Accountability and Transparency – , and not reopen or renego- tiate them. This would distract from much-needed country action. • Update related commitments (AAAA OP 58), to show how they enable sustainable de- velopment concretely and demonstrate how these commitments are linked to national development planning processes : i.e. that development co-operation that is owned and driven by rights holders (‘whole -of- society approaches’ ) allows for working with/enabling the policy environment of different partners while supporting public administrations; pro- moting harmonization and donor coordination addresses fragmentation and streamlining of efforts by partners; locally led initiatives, collective accountability, transparency and a focus on long-term results and impact builds trust; addressing poverty and inequalities and shared global challenges requires linking to broader governance and architectural re- form efforts and linking to broader policy coherence for sustainable development agenda etc. 3. PROPOSE MORE DIALOGUE AND KNOWLEDGE SHARING AMONG ALL STAKEHOLDERS EN- GAGED IN DEVELOPMENT COOPERATION: • Acknowledge the uniqueness of South-South co-operation (SSC), reaffirming SSC princi- ples, as well as Triangular Co-operation, and propose deepening dialogue and knowledge sharing opportunities to discuss and address effectiveness challenges all providers are facing . This requires reiterating the diverse history, mandate and self-un- derstanding of different partners and leveraging each of their strengths, especially of us- ing diverse modalities such as Triangular Cooperation, in different, especially complex contexts, and of coordination among DAC and non-DAC providers at country level, and globally.

11 October 2024 • Recommend to initiate/deepen dialogue among different types of providers to further share knowledge without regional distinction, align approaches and programmatic efforts, and foster greater collaboration, e.g. by using existing dialogues among providers (e.g., Global Providers Meeting, Arab-DAC meetings, LAC-DAC provider meetings, exchange in the context of South-South and Triangular Co-operation meetings, including in the BAPA+40 follow-up process, etc.). • Similar dialogue opportunities should also be made available for recipient partner coun- tries to share their lessons learned and best practices in optimizing the aid and/or assis- tance provided. • Dialogue and knowledge sharing should generally be inclusive of all stakeholders , in- cluding civil society and private sector. 4. PROMOTE COUNTRY ACTION THROUGH MONITORING EVIDENCE, DIALOGUE AND LEARNING: • Commit to a new learning agenda focused on country and local-level action based on evidence and inclusive dialogue with support of all key partners. At a time when trust has eroded, open, inclusive and participatory action dialogues at the country level are essential to build a common understanding and stronger partnerships, enabling each to make their best contribution to the national and other commonly agreed development goals. These dialogues should include all relevant actors and build on their plurality and diversity. National multi-stakeholder participation policies can be a useful instrument in this regard. This would require re-activating the ‘effectiveness ecosystems’ within coun- tries, and entail getting all relevant actors at the table (including all providers as well as non-executive entities), using existing dialogue platforms, focus on bottlenecks to deliver in specific contexts based on evidence from monitoring efforts to inform debate, and link up to existing, broader policy ambitions (both nationally and globally, e.g. INFFs), leading to action plans and commitments at country level to be delivered. This requires reaffirm- ing existing efforts to provide comprehensive data on effectiveness on a regular and timely basis, with the GPEDC monitoring being the most comprehensive exercise (see AAAA OP 53 and 125/126). This also requires careful thinking around how to promote the effectiveness of South-South co-operation at country level. • The evidence from the GPEDC monitoring serves as input for all actors with a stake in development to drive dialogue, learning and policy change in areas that emerge and to deliver on their commitments related to effectiveness on all types of development co- operation, as well as other commitments (including delivering on 0.7% of GNI/ODA). The monitoring evidence can also inform allocation decisions. 5. STREAMLINE THE GLOBAL DEVELOPMENT CO-OPERATION ARCHITECTURE: Reaffirm the need for frank global dialogue on development effectiveness underpinned by evidence . This requires driving political momentum at regional and global level by reiterating that: • The GPEDC is an accelerator of the SDGs and national development strategies, and serves as venue to drive country action on development effectiveness based on the GPEDC mon- itoring in a unique multi-stakeholder setting with all actors engaging on an equal footing in policy dialogue. • DCF and FFD review global trends in development co-operation and promote delivery on

11 October 2024 • The GPEDC HLM4 in 2026 is the next opportunity after FfD4 to take stock of development effectiveness, accelerate progress, drive accountability and inform policy dialogue at the United Nations on trends in development co-operation at the global level. In the context of the call for reform of the international financial architecture, FfD4 should consider: • How the global development co-operation architecture can be consolidated and stream- lined , being cognizant of different mandates, histories and self-understandings of differ- ent players, and being efficient, responsive, inclusive and open to all stakeholders, ad- dressing existing systemic imbalances, and learning from the lessons of different govern- ance arrangements. This is critical to restore trust in the multilateral system. The GPEDC, with its multi-stakeholder governance, could play a crucial role in shaping this reformed architecture. • How evidence from multiple mechanisms and frameworks reporting on sustainable de- velopment efforts can be consolidated , including by proposing to align the DCF survey and GPEDC monitoring in the medium-term. d. International trade as an engine for development • Reaffirm AAAA commitment to adhere to effectiveness principles when programming aid for trade. e. Debt and debt sustainability • Enhancing debt transparency is critically important for credible debt management. • Addressing sovereign debt distress • The document should support developing countries and LDCs in strengthening their fiscal policies and debt management systems to ensure sustainable debt levels and prevent future financial crises. The document should also support responsible lending and borrowing, based on transparency and national ownership. By improving debt sustainability frame- works, countries can better manage their obligations, avoid over indebtedness, and main- tain fiscal space for essential development projects. This rhymes with the GPEDC’s focus on enhancing the effectiveness of financial flows and ensuring that debt is managed transpar- ently and in ways that foster long-term development and financial stability. f. Addressing systemic issues: N/A g. Science, technology, innovation and capacity building: N/A III. Emerging issues • Advocate for the International Financial Institutions (IFIs) and Multilateral Development Banks (MDBs) to better align with the objectives of effective development co-operation. These institutions must prioritise financing of the most critical challenges for sustainable development, based on the needs and interests of partner countries. • In line with the GPEDC ’ s principles of inclusiveness and transparency, there is a growing need to create more inclusive and adaptive governance structures within IFIs and MDBs . This reform would foster a more equitable approach to development finance, allowing for better represen-

11 October 2024 promote mutual accountability and transparency (including through the International Aid Trans- parency Initiative, IATI), and foster behaviour change. All UN member states, from partner coun- tries to development partners, should commit to regularly participating in country-led GPEDC monitoring and follow-up action at country level, potentially linked to other processes (e.g., INFFs or VNRs). GPEDC Monitoring generates data for SDGs 5 and 17 and provides input to the revised UN Funding Compact. • Use the Kampala Principles Assessment (KPA) , a novel component of the GPEDC monitoring exercise, to generate evidence to track and stimulate greater effectiveness on private sector engagement in development co-operation. • A consolidation of efforts, based on the strengths of existing mechanisms within and beyond the United Nations, is needed to shift to a new era. The UN FfD Forum should include debate on the quality, impact and effectiveness of all types of development co-operation, while the GPEDC continues generating data, supporting policy dialogue and learning and promoting ac- countability and progress on development effectiveness. • The international community will be able to capitalise on the 4 GPEDC High-Level Meeting (2026) to take the pulse of progress of commitments related to effectiveness made at FfD4 , and the regular Busan Forums the Government of the Republic of Korea is organizing to review trends and promote learning and knowledge sharing on emerging effectiveness challenges. The GPEDC, together with its partners from UNDP, the OECD and UNDCO, will also support country- led dialogue for taking action on GPEDC monitoring findings. • It will be important for the international community to follow up on all commitments made in the FfD4, and we therefore propose to build in a follow up process to measure and report on the commitments, including on development effectiveness, made in the Outcome Document of FfD4. This will enable follow-up and accountability by all actors. END