UN-OHRLLS Financing Policy Brief for FfD4 An Interna=onal Investment Support Centre for the Least Developed Countries Key messages • Foreign direct investment is a key source of economic development and external finance, with a complementary and cataly;c role vis-à-vis domes;c resource mobiliza;on and investment and development finance. • For more than four decades, United Na;ons member states have consistently resolved to help least developed countries (LDCs) aHract foreign direct investment (FDI) needed to achieve sustainable development. The importance placed on FDI and measures to secure its greater flow to LDCs are embodied in every LDC program of ac;on (Paris, 1981; Paris, 1990; Brussels, 2001; Istanbul, 2011; Doha, 2022) and every agreement on financing for development (Monterey Consensus, Doha Declara;on, Addis Ababa Ac;on Agenda -AAAA). • Yet, the LDCs have been largely unable to capitalize on the last thirty years of historically unrivaled growth in global FDI, with their share increasing only very modestly and at low absolute levels. In contrast, their financing needs to achieve the SDGs have steadily increased. • As a follow-up to AAAA para. 46, member states requested in the Doha Programme of Ac;on that a study be carried out to explore the feasibility of an interna;onal investment support centre for the LDCs (DPOA para 261). • The mapping and gaps analysis phase of the requested feasibility study has determined that, despite a crowded field of technical assistance and capacity-building support for FDI cul;va;on, an interna;onal investment support centre for the LDCs could fill some key gaps in the exis;ng landscape by focusing on unprecedented and high-value services and providing coordinated support without duplica;ng but complemen;ng exis;ng arrangements, to countries showing high levels of commitment to the reforms and prac;ces needed to op;mize FDI inflows and reap their fullest benefit. Problem statement With only six years to go before the 2030 deadline of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), the development financing gap is now es;mated at a staggering USD 4.2 trillion annually, almost double the levels before the COVID-19 pandemic. For the forty-five LDCs, progress towards the SDGs has been jeopardized by mul;ple global crises, the climate emergency, and a growing debt burden. Their gross domes;c product (GDP) growth was about 3.4 percent in 2022 and 4.4 percent in 2023, and current projec;ons have it at about 4.8 percent for 2024 –far less than the SDG target of 7 percent. With the share of total official development assistance

to LDCs reaching its lowest levels in over a decade , a shrinking fiscal space, high debt burdens, and con;nued dependency on vola;le commodi;es, these countries require urgent and bold ac;on from the interna;onal community to ensure beHer access to affordable financing. The chart below shows that FDI inflows to the LDCs are very low, and for most of them, annual growth is flat. In absolute terms, in the eight years since adop;on of the SDGs, annual FDI flows to LDCs as a group have fluctuated in a narrow band between $21 billion and $31 billion, with large outlier projects in individual countries ofen driving the group’s growth in a given year, and with just five countries (Cambodia, Bangladesh, Ethiopia, Uganda, and Senegal) accoun;ng for a majority of the LDC total of 2.35% of global flows in 2023. Chart: Shares of global FDI since 1990s Although the generally flat growth of FDI in LDCs since 2015 appears to parallel the global trend, it arguably hides a worsening of the LDCs’ rela;ve posi;on. The composi;on of global FDI is predominated by the service sector, which may grow in knowledge intensity with higher associated levels of technology, skills, and/or wages, while FDI to the LDCs con;nues to be drawn primarily to food and beverage manufacturing, advisory services, infrastructure and construc;on, garment manufacturing, extrac;ve industries, and tourism. This picture clearly manifests the inability of most of the LDCs to benefit from exis;ng support measures in aHrac;ng sufficient FDI flows of the type that creates employment and decent work, promotes skills development and provides learning effects and demand for local firms.

Investment-related technical assistance and capacity building support is available to LDCs from over 50 UN agencies, interna;onal organiza;ons, mul;lateral development banks and development partner agencies. However, in most cases, the assistance is supply-driven rather than demand-driven and is ofen not provided on the same medium to long term ;mescale that is needed to support the investment life- cycle. These are some of the fundamental obstacles and structural challenges that make it difficult for the assistance to be effec;vely absorbed by the countries themselves, and therefore incen;vize sufficient FDI flows of the type that creates employment and decent work, promotes skills development, and provides learning effects and demand for local firms. A radical step change is needed if a higher share of FDI flows is to benefit the LDCs, in a context of shrinking fiscal space, high debt burdens, low produc;ve capaci;es and con;nued dependency on vola;le commodi;es. As requested in the DPOA, a new interna;onal investment support centre could be the transforma;onal measure that is needed. To jus;fy such a centre, however, it would have to be more than just another body in an already crowded field with a more than three-decade history, more than 100 interna;onal and na;onal expert bodies and well-established best prac;ces. A successful centre would iden;fy structural problems in the current global approach to FDI and one that can develop and implement innova;ve solu;ons to achieve unprecedented FDI outcomes for LDCs. Policy solu3ons The findings emerging from the feasibility study, as elaborated by the UN Secretary-General in its Report A/79/505 , support establishing a transforma;ve centre, that can realize unprecedented outcomes for the LDCs. If such centre is to achieve what has eluded the field’s leading actors to date, it will do so by filling a small number of narrow, high-value gaps that structural impediments prevent other interna;onal partners from filling, and by providing coordinate support without duplica;ng but complemen;ng exis;ng arrangements. A transforma;ve centre should provide the following globally unprecedented and high-value services: a. Comprehensive, Long-Term NaBonal Level Capacity-Building Support and Guidance for individual LDCs that demand it and demonstrate commitment: • The centre should provide na;onal-level guidance to individual LDCs on the direct pursuit of targeted FDI and progressive capacity-building for the nine essen;al government func;ons . Such guidance and capacity-building support should help individual LDCs systema;cally harness available TA within a comprehensive, na;onal, strategic framework for FDI cul;va;on that directly contributes to the country’s progress towards SDG achievement through effec;ve monitoring and evalua;on. b. First-of-a-kind databases and networks for commonly prioriBzed sectors and projects for all LDC governments, potenBal investors, and technical assistance providers operaBng in the country : • These databases should be developed by local officials under the guidance and support of the centre experts for the purpose of enabling project due diligence, site selec;on, and financial partner matchmaking in LDCs, where the absence of informa;on and interna;onally recognized networks have thus far precluded serious considera;on of FDI.

A fully opera;onal centre could provide long-term, country-specific guidance by assigning staff to serve as full-;me na;onal FDI managers to no more than a few countries each, for as long as the country and the centre remain engaged. In this way, the centre and the par;cipa;ng LDC government would take sustained, joint ownership of long-term planning, coordina;on and implementa;on of a na;onal FDI plan, which would comprise measures for direct pursuit of FDI and government capacity-building, as follows: (a) Direct pursuit of FDI: Genera;ng FDI leads and conver;ng them into actual FDI projects, in coordina;on with a dedicated staff member in the na;onal investment promo;on agency and a dedicated staff member in the relevant public office for each priority sector (e.g. Ministry of Agriculture for agro-processing); (b) Capacity-building for beLer culBvaBon of FDI and its benefits: Con;nuously pursuing technical assistance and donor funds to fill gaps in the nine core government func;ons needed to cul;vate FDI and its benefits: (i) policymaking, (ii) business regula;on, (iii) sector/market research, (iv) promo;on of purely private projects, (v) public-private partnerships, (vi) special economic zones, (vii) development finance, (viii) dispute resolu;on and (ix) interna;onal agreements. In addi;on, directly build capacity for the prepara;on of data needed by investors for loca;on selec;on in LDCs. Specific recommenda3ons for FFD4 The FFD4 conference is being held at cri;cal ;me when the share of total ODA to LDCs has reached its lowest levels in over a decade, debt burdens are on the rise and fiscal space is further shrinking. Member States should note with concern that despite having repeatedly resolved over the past decades to support the LDCs in this area s;ll, their share of global FDI flows has remained around 2%. At FFD4, Member States must call for the opera;onaliza;on of concrete innova;ve solu;ons to help LDCs beHer cul;vate FDI towards sustainable development. The FFD4 conference should therefore support the establishment of a transforma;ve interna;onal investment support centre for the LDCs (as per DPOA para 261), one that can realize significantly improved FDI outcomes for these countries, by focusing on unprecedented and high-value services and providing coordinated support, without duplica;ng but complemen;ng exis;ng arrangements, to countries showing high levels of commitment to the reforms and prac;ces needed to op;mize FDI inflows and reap their fullest benefit. Summary The contribu;on of Foreign Direct Investment to the sustainable development of LDCs has yet to materialize, despite decades of commitments and a crowded field of investment-related technical assistance. A radical step change is needed. A transforma;onal investment support centre should be established to realize unprecedented FDI outcomes for the 45 LDCs, by engaging them in long-term planning, coordina;on, implementa;on and monitoring and evalua;on of a country’s tailored strategic FDI plan, comprising measures for direct pursuit of FDI and government capacity-building for beHer,