Financing Policy Brief Series – Recommenda6ons for FfD4 The role of remi;ances and diaspora investments in financing the SDGs The Interna’onal Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the Interna’onal Organiza’on for Migra’on (IOM) have join tly developed this Policy Brief on unlocking the full poten:al of remi<ances and diaspora investment for Member States’ considera:on in prepara:on for the FfD4. Key messages • Migrants' remi<ances are a major source of private finance for LMICs, surpassing foreign direct investment (FDI) and official development assistance (ODA). In 2023, remi<ances to LMICs amounted to approximately $656 billion and are projected to reach $5 trillion cumula:vely by 2030. • Beyond remi<ances, migrants also invest back home and contribute substan:al human and financial capital in the form of skills and networks into their countries of origin. • Remi<ances and diaspora investments significantly benefit rural areas and less developed countries by bridging financing gaps for millions of households. These funds help liY people out of poverty, improve health and nutri:on, and keep children in school, all development goals. They also enable people to acquire assets, start businesses and strengthen their livelihoods, and enhance resilience to climate-related challenges. • Unlocking Full Poten’al: Despite their importance, the full poten:al of remi<ances and diaspora investment for sustainable development remain unrealised. Enhanced interna:onal support and strategic commitment could harness these financial flows to address long-term goals, significantly advancing the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Problem statement The unmet poten’al of remiBances and diaspora economic contribu’ons to address shorEalls in development finance in Low- and Middle-Income Countries (LMICs). Developing countries face annual shor_alls of up $4 trillion in financing their own development. Remi<ances and diaspora economic contribu:ons can go some way in addressing this. Remi<ances to LMICs through formal channels were es:mated at $656 billion in 2023 for forecast to reach $671 billion in 2024, larger than both FDI and ODA flows combined . Remi<ances and diaspora investments already fund the a<ainment of the sustainable development goals (SGDs). These contribu:ons liY people out of poverty, and pay for food, medical and educa:on expenses. They are invested in the local community, crea:ng

decent jobs and driving economic growth. Each of these is a Sustainable Development Goal. Yet, this role is largely unheralded in the financing for development discourse. To address this, and realize the full poten’al of these resources addressing financing for development shorEalls, several key challenges that require targeted interven:ons and policy improvements have been iden:fied: 1. Low rates of financial and digital inclusion and literacy amongst migrants and their families impede their ability to take advantage of cheaper, safer and faster remi<ance services as well as their ability to invest back home. This is par:cularly the case for more vulnerable groups such as women, youth or those living in rural areas. It pushes them to use cash or informal methods for sending money back home which are more expensive and less safe and impedes their ability to access linked financial services such as savings, credit, insurance or investment products. 2. The lack of an enabling regulatory environment also impedes financial inclusion and uptake of remi<ances and investment. An: money laundering (AML) and comba:ng the financing of terrorism (CFT) legisla:on is oYen misaligned over different jurisdic:ons and imply onerous compliance procedures. OYen banks do not take a risk-based approach to such regula:ons, in contradic:on with Financial Ac:on Task Force recommenda:ons, leaving money transfer organiza:ons (MTOs) derisked and without bank accounts. Similarly, central banks do not have :ered account regula:ons that would permit those with incomplete documenta:on to open low value accounts. Finally, a lack of compe::on on certain corridors results in expensive remi<ance pricing. 3. Lack of financial sector depth including underdeveloped payment systems: The lack of financial sector depth also impedes the ability to invest as well as linking remi<ances to deeper financial services. This includes payment systems infrastructure where a lack of interna:onal interoperability increases the fric:on of sending remi<ances across borders. Even where the financial sector is more developed, a lack of incen:ves or blended finance to crowd in investment from the diaspora impedes the development impact of this economic capital. 4. Inadequate data and analysis: Current systems for collec:ng and analyzing remi<ance and diaspora investment data are underdeveloped. This lack of comprehensive informa:on hampers the ability of policymakers and private sector actors to make informed decisions and design effec:ve interven:ons that could leverage these funds for greater development impact. Policy solu3ons To fully harness the poten’al of remiBances and diaspora investments in LMICs , a comprehensive approach is required. Governments and interna:onal organiza:ons need to renew and expand their commitments by implemen:ng the following key policy ac:ons: 1. Enhancing financial and digital inclusion:

Implement targeted financial literacy programs for migrants and their families, focusing on vulnerable groups such as women, youth, and those in rural areas. These programs should educate them on the benefits of using formal remi<ance channels and linked financial services like savings, credit, insurance, and investment products. These programs can be extended to diaspora investors and local entrepreneurs to enhance the effec:veness and sustainability of investment opportuni:es. Promote digital inclusion by providing access to affordable and reliable internet services and digital tools. This can help migrants and their families take advantage of cheaper, safer, and faster remi<ance services and would promote access to digital financial services, including in rural areas. 2. Strengthen remiBance, and diaspora investment data collec’on and analysis : Develop and implement robust systems for collec:ng and analyzing remi<ance and diaspora investment data which will inform more effec:ve policy-making and private sector strategies. 3. Promote harmonized regulatory frameworks and payment system infrastructure: Advocate for harmonizing AML/CFT regula:ons across jurisdic:ons. Encourage banks to adopt a risk-based approach to these regula:ons, in line with Financial Ac:on Task Force recommenda:ons, to prevent the de-risking of money transfer organiza:ons (MTOs) and low-value cross-border transfers. Introduce :ered account regula:ons that allow individuals with incomplete documenta:on to open low-value accounts. Permit non-banks to process remi<ances to facilitate lower-cost digital providers entering the market. 4. Improve financial sector depth: Encourage the adop:on of remi<ance-linked financial services such as credit, savings, and insurance which can provide addi:onal financial security and opportuni:es for recipients and investors. Invest in payment system infrastructure and adop:on of ISO 20022 messaging standards to facilitate interoperability at interna:onal, regional and domes:c level as per recommenda:ons in the G20 roadmap for cross-border payments. 5. Engage with the diaspora: Ensure the provision of safe and regular pathways to support financial and digital inclusion of migrants and help fuller economic integra:on. Develop diaspora engagement strategies that look to harness diaspora contribu:ons to development including investment. Involve them in design and decision-making processes to help build trust and ensure sustainability. Mainstream diaspora involvement across all policy areas that impact on them to help reduce bureaucra:c and logis:cal barriers to their development.

Create finance mechanisms to crowd in investment from the diaspora. This can involve public-private partnerships blended finance, first loss mechanisms, guarantee funds and fiscal incen:ves. By addressing these areas, the donor community and policymakers can create an environment that maximizes the benefits of remi<ances and diaspora investments, reduces costs and supports sustainable development, climate resilience and economic stability in LMICs. Specific recommenda3ons for FFD4 Remi<ances and diaspora investments are a vital source of external finance and a significant contributor to the SDGs. Remi<ances and diaspora investments are forecast to con:nue to grow due to predicted increases in human mobility. Meanwhile high remi<ance costs and incomplete policies negate the posi:ve impact that these flows have on financing sustainable development. To fully harness their poten:al, Member States should: • Acknowledge the cri:cal role of the diaspora in financing the SDGs in LMICs par:cularly with regard to remi<ances and investment. Ensure that remi<ances and diaspora investment are explicitly covered in the FFD4 thema:c discussions and outcome document, including its monitoring and evalua:on framework, and also a dedicated sec:on within the next itera:on of the Financing for Sustainable Development Report (FSDR). • Call for the widespread access to formal, cost-effec:ve, and secure remi<ance services in the FFD4 outcome document and in the monitoring and evalua:on frameworks that follow, with a focus on promo:ng and implemen:ng suppor:ve regulatory frameworks, advancements in payment systems, and digital solu:ons - especially in rural areas. • Ensure that the FFD4 outcome document calls for the promo:on of compe::ve remi<ance market condi:ons, the adop:on of risk-based KYC/CDD approaches, and improved financial inclusion, emphasizing the need for expanded remi<ance-linked financial services and enhanced digital and financial literacy, par:cularly for women. Addi:onally, the document should highlight the importance of providing pre-departure training for migrants. • Call for the promo:on of compe::ve market condi:ons, risk-based KYC/CDD approaches, improved financial inclusion, expanded remi<ance-linked financial services and enhanced digital and financial literacy, par:cularly for women, and pre-departure training for migrants. • Enhance the diaspora’s capacity to support development in their home countries by, among others, iden:fying and removing investment barriers, crea:ng suppor:ve investment environments, raising awareness and building capacity within the diaspora to mobilize, and facilita:ng the crea:on of investment vehicles and mechanisms that offer technical and financial support to diaspora investors.

75-word summary of the brief for the website Remi<ances and diaspora investments are a major source of external private finance crucial for achieving SDGs, but their full poten:al remains largely untapped. Member States should acknowledge their poten:al and renew and expand their commitments to maximize their impact to development, ensuring access to formal, affordable, and secure remi<ance services through suppor:ve regula:ons, improved payment systems, digital solu:ons, and promo:ng financial inclusion for both migrants and their families back home. At the same :me, Member States should facilitate and support diaspora investments to homeland SMEs by crea:ng diaspora engagement strategies and suppor:ve environments, capacity-building for diaspora members, involve them in policy development, remove investment barriers, and provide adequate mechanisms to crowd in their investment.