Submission of Inputs for an Elements Paper on Financing for Development Submission by researchers on the New Frontiers in International Development Finance (NeFDeF) project 15 October 2024 We welcome the initiative of the Co-Facilitators of the Outcome Document to various stakeholders including the member states individually or as groups and non-state actors to call for substantive inputs in preparation of the Fourth International Conference on Financing for Development (FfD 4) taking place in Seville, Spain from 30 June – 3 July 2025. We commend the Co-Facilitators of the Conference for providing stakeholders an opportunity to contribute to the preparation of the elements paper that will significantly inform the deliberations of the Conference Preparatory Committee Meeting in New York from 3-6 December 2024 and the contents of the subsequent draft of the Outcome Document of the FfD 4 Conference. Noting the broader objectives of the FfD 4 that includes assessment of the previous FfD Conferences’ Outcome Documents and identifying the impediments to achievement of their objectives global and recommendations thereto, the members of the New Frontiers in Development Finance (NeFDeF) project would like to share their insights drawn from their international research expertise on the legal and policy architecture of broader sustainable development, development and climate finance and the growing trend towards increased private sector engagements with sustainable development objectives. Our submission focuses specifically on various elements falling in the broader action areas including, domestic and international private business and finance, international development cooperation, international trade as an engine for development and Debt and debt sustainability. 1. Domestic and international private business and finance The Outcomes Documents of the previous FfD Conferences have emphasized the importance of the private sector in the development and the need to promote private sectors involvement in the development agenda. The Addis Ababa AcWon Agenda 2015 notes that businesses, investments and innovaWon are “…major drivers of producWvity, inclusive economic growth and job creaWon” (Para 35). Among the ways of promoWng the private sector as a driver of development include, firstly, promoWng “an enabling environment” parWcularly in states considered least developed countries (LDCs) and small and island states (SIS) through legal and regulatory reforms to incenWvize private sector. Some of these incenWves include tax reliefs, removal of formal restricWons on foreign business operaWons and export of profits, access in land and natural resource-based investments that o^en have adverse impacts including arbitrary displacement on the human rights of the local communiWes. Market-oriented moWvaWons to

naWonal policy and legal space in relaWon to naWonally determined priority focus areas in, for example sectoral development and human rights issues. Secondly, we have been witnessing an increasing shi^ towards the use of innovaWve mechanisms and tools to promote private sector involvement in sustainable development. Notably, financial insWtuWons such as mulWlateral development banks, bilateral development finance insWtuWons and other investors have increasingly employed mechanisms and tools that include public-private partnerships, blended financing and de-risking instruments including loans (concessional and non-concessional), equity, grants and guarantees to a_ract addiWonal private finance through de-risking and promote domesWc and internaWonal private business acWviWes including foreign direct investments and infrastructure financing. While these mechanisms and tools are considered innovaWve in unlocking the private sector financing, there is risk of the impacts of power-imbalance with powerful investors shaping the domesWc financial markets and creaWng potenWal further indebtedness of already highly indebted countries” and ulWmate “(Foreign) capital” dominaWon “in the state–capital relaWonship.” With the growing trend towards infrastructure financing coupled with green transiWon iniWaWves, the wealthy donor countries as groups or individually have developed iniWaWves geared towards clean energy infrastructure and technologies with private sector actors being at the center of these iniWaWves. The G7’s Partnership for Global Infrastructure and Investment (PGII) (2022) and the European Union’s Global Gateway (2021) are examples of iniWaWves that aims at promoWng public and private sector investments in infrastructure development and financing. While the objecWves of these iniWaWves include filling the infrastructure financing gap and ensure “universal access to affordable, reliable modern and sustainable energy services for all by 2030” in line with the Addis Ababa AcWon Agenda (para. 49), the iniWal implementaWon of these iniWaWves points towards renewed South to North extracWvism in investments on criWcal mineral resources. We urge the Co-facilitators to emphasize the key role of public financing for developing states in achieving sustainable development and the importance of an internationally enabling environment and to ensure that human rights and environmental considerations form an integral part of private sector investments. Market-based approach prioritizing return on investments without concrete commitments

to respect human rights of the people and the environmental protections in the host countries needs to be reassessed. We urge the Co-Facilitators to re-calibrate approach taken in relation to private business, investments and development financing, to ensure respect for human rights and the environment in context of the core human rights and environmental law instruments as opposed to voluntary non- binding schemes and the require the private actors to comply with human rights and environmental standards as opposed the permissive language that include providing “…incentives for compliance” (Para 37 Addis Ababa Action Agenda). 2. International development cooperation a. Use of Public Finance to catalyse, mobilise and de-risk additional private finance The crucial role of international development cooperation cannot be overemphasized noting the ever- increasing global inequality, the adverse impacts of the climate change, the conflicts and wars around the globe (Chapter IIIC, Financing for Sustainable Development Report 2024). Official Development Assistance (ODA) has been an important source of development aid to the least developed and developing countries for the provision of public goods. Although ODA flows have been increasing, there is notable shortfall on ODA commitments when compared to the United Nations ODA target of 0.7 per cent of gross national income (GNI) by the OECD Development Assistance Committee donor members. Due to increasing demand for development aid, the Addis Ababa Action Agenda called for a shift towards the use of public finance including ODA to catalyse additional finance from both public and private sources through mechanisms including blended finance and de-risking of private investments (para 54). Overall, ODA aims to promote economic development and welfare of target developing countries in public sectors including health, water, education, housing among others. The shift towards the use of ODA in blended financing and de-risking instruments to attract private sector engagement means that private financing, majorly in form loans and equity becomes a major source of funding for public goods and services in the target countries. Additionally, blending of public and private finance has implications on the regulatory framework whereupon both public and private institutions are subjected to regimes originally designed for commercial and corporate transactions, and public development finance is subjected to private sector regulation with potential negative impacts on transparency and accountability in the use of public funds. Although the aim of tools like blended finance is to generate additional financing to the LDCs, that has

not been the case as limited private finance is invested in the LDCs. The OECD Report of 2020 shows that between 2012 and 2018, USD 13.4 billion of private finance was mobilized in the LDCs, which amount represents only 6% of the total private finance mobilised with guarantees mobilising the highest amount. In 2022 alone, USD 61.5 billion of private finance was mobilized by bilateral and multilateral financing institutions with the larger percentage being mobilized in sectors such as energy and banking and the lowest in social sectors. The low flows of private investments to both to LDCs and the social sectors is because of lack of bankable and commercially viable projects. We welcome the Inter-agency Task Force on Financing for Development’s proposal for “a switch from a search for bankability to a search for quality and impact” of projects in LDCs particularly where the public funds are used to mobilizes private sector. We request that the Co-facilitators consider the evidence of trends of the blended finance flows to social sectors in LDCs. Although the motivation behind these innovative financial instruments is to provide financial additionality, the objective is not being met as private finance has been demonstrated to flow away from where it is most needed. We urge the Co-facilitators to emphasize upscaling of public finance towards the public sector for social sectors such as education, health and water and sanitation. We also submit that international development cooperation should aim at developing local capacity of the public institutions to provide social services instead of a move that seemingly seeks to replace the public sector with private sector actors, creating accountability risks. b. Climate Finance and debt for nature swaps Energy transition in developing countries through Just Energy Transition Partnerships (JETPs) is another important frontier within Financing for Development, that attests to the prioritization of private financing through de-risking, more specifically in the climate finance sphere. Currently rolled out in South Africa, Indonesia and Vietnam, our research highlights that the JETP approach relies on voluntary commitments from donor countries to attract foreign investors in the renewable energy sector through incentives, such as guarantees, public-private partnerships (PPPs) and blended finance, while phasing out domestic coal and other fossil fuel production in the host state. There is a risk that ODA will be diverted and re-labeled as ‘cllimate finance’, which would undermine the principle of ‘additionality’ of climate finance as

embedded in the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) and the Paris Agreement and may negatively affect the mobilization of financial resources in meeting other sustainable development objectives. We urge the Co-facilitators to put an accent on the legal commitments around climate finance, ensuring that climate finance is guided by the multilaterally-agreed principles of equity and common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities (CBDR-RC), additionality, predictability and country ownership. In addition, climate finance should not divert existing financing from other Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). Climate change adaptation and mitigation programmes and projects funded by climate finance should be designed and rolled-out in an inclusive and participatory manner taking into account the sustainable development needs and human rights of peoples who ought to be the ultimate beneficiaries of sustainable development. The climate finance landscape also marks a recent surge of debt swaps through which the savings are repurposed to support SDGs, and more specifically, climate goals. Although such a model aims to create some fiscal space –though o^en quite limited - among developing countries, the negoWaWon processes are highly sensiWve to financial speculaWon, undermining the commitment to ‘democraWc and transparent insWtuWons responsive to the needs of the people.’ Likewise, strict condiWonaliWes and financial liabiliWes that are Wed to environmental milestones in exchange for debt reducWon endangers naWonal ownership and limits the policy space, parWcularly in Wmes of loss and damage suffered from extreme weather events. As concluded by, among others, the InternaWonal Monetary Fund, debt swaps do not represent a soluWon to the debt crisis among the developing naWons so long as they are o^en unsuccessful lowering debt to GDP raWo to sustainable levels. 3. International trade as an engine for development a. Regional economic integration and international trade. Regional integration is recognized as an important initiative to promote free trade and movement of goods across the various regional economic communities. The Addis Ababa Action urges the interna- tional community to support initiatives, projects and cooperation frameworks “…that foster regional and subregional integration, with special attention to Africa” (Para 87). States can also conclude trade and

investment agreements (bilateral and regional) compatible with WTO rules which have a great potential to link the developing countries’ enterprises into the global value chains (Para 87). We submit that although partnerships agreements like Economic Partnership Agreements (EPA) concluded bilaterally or sub-regionally, for example African Growth and Opportunity Act (AGOA) between the United States and some African Countries and the Samoa Agreement between the EU and its Member States with the Organisation of African, Caribbean and Pacific States (OACPS) aim at promoting trade between and among member states involved, such agreements have the potential of slowing down if not hindering regional integration in Africa. We encourage the Co-Facilitators to urge the international community to focus on strengthening and deepening the existing regional integration initiatives led by African states like the African Continental Free Trade Area that seeks to create one African Market. 4. Debt and debt sustainability- Unsustainable debts in the least developed and island states Work by Connely, Patricio Ferreira Lima and Tan underscores that ‘the absence of appropriate mechanisms to deal with the burgeoning debt owed by sovereigns to private creditors and what has been classed as ‘non-traditional’ or non-Paris Club bilateral creditors’ is an important legal and regulatory impediment, which creates further difficulties in collective coordinated action in tackling sovereign debt issues as they arise. Consequently, developing countries faced with debt distress encounter difficulties in restructuring their debt using existing frameworks given the ‘diversified creditor base’. We urge the Co-Facilitators to draw attention within the FfD 4 of the need for legal and regulatory reforms to enable developing countries to access effective debt restructuring mechanisms that do not create additional long-term financial burdens on countries and that do not undermine the ability of countries facing debt distress to address sustainable development needs of their populations. In addition, new development and climate finance initiatives such as JETPs are heavily reliant on debt instruments and market-based mechanisms – including loans, guarantees and sovereign bonds – to finance decarbonisation and economic transition plans, with official finance geared towards catalysing commercial sources of financing. Reliance on loans, even official loans on concessional terms, will impact

on developing countries’ fiscal position and debt sustainability while reliance on commercial finance can increase contingent liabilities on the state (for state-guaranteed loans) and expose countries to volatility in international financial markets and legal risks of disorderly sovereign debt defaults in the absence of appropriate mechanism to deal with private creditors. The ongoing debt crisis and lack of appropriate mechanisms for restructuring thereof also exacerbate the vulnerabilities caused by climate change among the least developed and island nations. Although international environmental law and the sustainable development agenda has recognized the specific circumstances of the LDCs and SIDS in terms of technology transfer and financial assistance, unfulfilled commitments hinder the application of such a principle. The fact that market-based instruments consist of debt-based climate finance raises concerns regarding their potential negative impacts on the progressive realization of economic, social and cultural rights, as well as the SDGs. Indeed, the previous UN Special Rapporteur on human rights and the environment, David R. Boyd, had concluded that ‘market- based solutions alone are not an adequate or just solution to the climate finance woes facing SIDS.’ As expressed by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights, a human rights-based approach to financing climate change mitigation and adaptation of ocean ecosystems is an obligation rather than an option. The input is submiOed by the following members of the New FronPers in InternaPonal Development Finance (NeF DeF) Project: • Professor Celine Tan, School of Law, University of Warwick, UK • Dr. Gamze Erdem Türkelli, Associate Research Professor, Law & Development Research Goup, Faculty of Law, University of Antwerp, Belgium • Dr. Anil Yilmaz Vastardis, Senior Lecturer, Essex Law School, University of Essex, UK • Janet Jebichii Sego, PhD Fellow (Research FoundaWon Flanders - FWO), Law & Development Research Goup, Faculty of Law, University of Antwerp, Belgium • Arinç Onat Kiliç, PhD Researcher, Law & Development Research Group, Faculty of Law, University of Antwerp, Belgium

New FronPers in InternaPonal Development Finance (NeF DeF) The New FronWers in InternaWonal Development Finance (NeF DeF) project brings together research and policy thinking on the law, regulaWon and governance impacts of the shi^ing landscape of internaWonal development finance. The NeF DeF project seeks to engage in an interdisciplinary examinaWon of these changes in internaWonal development finance policy and pracWce, drawing from insights from a range of disciplines including law, poliWcs, economics and finance, sociology and geography. Our focus is to map, assess and criWque this evolving architecture and what this means for internaWonal development cooperaWon and global economic governance. h_ps://warwick.ac.uk/fac/soc/law/research/projects/nefdef/