Contribution from the Data For Now initiative to the “Elements paper” for the Financing for Development process This submission is made by the core members of the Data For Now initiative, comprising the Global Partnership for Sustainable Development Data, the Sustainable Development Solutions Network, United Nations Development Program, United Nations Statistics Division andtheWorldBank.Thefiveagencies are actively engaging in capacity development activities on data and statistics under the Data for Now initiativeandaredrawingtheinputfromengagementwithcountriessupportedundertheinitiative. I. A global financing framework (including cross-cutting issues) Strong national data and statistical systems are essential for advancing the financing for development agenda as they are the building blocks that are needed to understand the state of the economy , including public financial and debt management, investment decisions and in measuring progress of national, regional and global development goals. This includes information on different sub-groupsonthepopulation,climateandpovertymattersthatrelatetosustainablefinancing. According to the 2024 Sustainable Development Report (page 7), “only 65 percent ofcountrieshadfully funded and implemented national statistical plans. The funding gap is more pronounced in low- and lower-middle-income countries,whereonly35percenthavesufficientfunding”. Investmentsindataand in official statistics should therefore be integrated into the core action areas of the FFD agenda and reflected prominently in the outcome document . These investments should not be limited to monitoring progress but embedded directly within national budgeting processes. Establishing dedicated financing mechanisms will support statistical capacity and safeguard the continuity of data systems, making them a fundamental part of economic planning. Long-term strategies for statistical development will ensure these systems remain resilient and adaptable to evolving challenges. Promoting a culture of data-driven decision-making among policymakers, reinforced by targeted capacity-building efforts, will further embed statistical insights into public financial management, investment strategies, and inclusive developmentinitiatives. II. Action areas a. Domestic public resources Reliable access to granular and timely data and statistics is a precondition for understanding domestic revenuegenerationandformakingsoundpolicydecisionsandinvestments. To help ensure that good quality data and statistics are available to decision makers, and to increase efficiency of the government,dataandgeospatialinformationshouldbesharedbetween government agencies. By sharing and re-using data for statistics production, governments save

Similarly, investing in open data initiatives and standards can strengthen transparency in tracking public resources and should thus be considered a priority. Non-traditional data and statistics can contribute to economic forecasting and predicting trends and investments across various locationsatagranularlevel. This also encourages partnerships across various government institutions to streamline data collection, sharing, andanalysisforaholisticanalysisofresourcemanagement,publicservicedelivery,performance management,andpromotinginclusion. In addition, member states should engage citizens in decision making processes, ensuring that budget allocation and fiscal oversight are data-driven, with citizen involvement. Fostering partnerships between civilsocietyandnationalstatisticalofficescanfostertrustandbetteraddresslocalcommunitypriorities. Empowering NSOs and other concerned government entities to lead digital innovation and data governance efforts is critical to enhancing these practices, ensuring that data collection is efficient, integrated, and free from duplications. This will also address existing data gaps while enabling the integration of technologies such as big data and AI into policymaking processes. In this process, confidentialityandprivacymustremainparamount,underpinnedbyappropriatelegalframeworks. b. Domestic and international private business and finance Member states should explore public-private partnerships to leverage technical expertise, infrastructure, and resources available within the private sector . The World Bank World Development Report 2021, Data for Better Lives, highlights how public private partnerships (while engaging academia, civil society, and other stakeholders) can increase demand and use of data and further highlights the importance of how data in national development plans will encourage partnerships thatcansupportbetterdecisionmaking. Member states should consider strengthening partnerships to createaconduciveenvironmentof sharing data collected by private sector, such as mobile phone data or scanner data, for use in statistics production as they provide a rich resource to complement available information. Such partnerships can accelerate the development of robust national statistical systems and ensure the availability of timely, high-quality data. As examples, use of mobile phone data to inform general movements (not on individual level), can inform tourism statistics, improve regional statistics and many otherareas.Scannerdatacanhelpimprovepricestatisticsandnationalaccounts. c. International development cooperation Currently only a small share of all investmentindataandstatisticsgoestosupportthenationalstatistical system. According to the Sustainable Development Goals Report 2024 a total of 45countriesorregions received donor funding, with half of them being low- and lower-middle-income nations. Investments in national data and statistics can increase cross-country coordination (data collection and sharing) among various stakeholders during aregionalorglobalcrisissuchasadisaster,pandemic,migration,etc.Italso supports the development of global standards and practices for data-driven development initiatives and enablestransparencyandaccountabilityofoutcomes.

partners should also commit to using national data and statistics where available, invest in building national capacities where needed or where data and statistics do not exist, and reduce use of parallel data collection processes wherepossible.Memberstatesshouldalsoreviewglobalfundingflowsfordata andstatisticstorewardintegratedandcross-systemsupportofnationaldataandstatisticalsystems. f. Addressing systemic issues Member states should commit to investing in data sharing and in strengthening national statistical systems to have a better knowledge base for decision making onthevarioussystemic issues . As examples, timely and robust data and statistics help governments inform policy decisions that can identify priority areas for investment. This can result in more efficientallocationofresources,maximizing the impact of public spending and meeting the needs of the population. Investments in geospatial data and statistics can significantly enhance the planning and management of urban areas and improve service delivery. Access to geospatial information and technologies can assist governments in determining optimal locations for new roads, schools, healthcare facilities, and other infrastructure, reducingcosts. With the increase in the frequency and intensity of disasters and climate impacts, investments in geospatial data and statistics enhance disaster preparedness and response. Through real-timemapping of affectedareasandvulnerablepopulations,governmentscanallocateresourceseffectivelyanddevelop strategiestoreducerecoverycostsinthelongterm. Understanding spatial patterns in demographics, industry, and infrastructure can contribute to targeted economic policies, attracting new investments and increasing domestic revenue throughenhancinglocal economies,businessgrowth,andincreasedemploymentopportunities. Most importantly, these investments will enhance the monitoring and evaluation of policies, allowing timelyinterventionsandamendmentsthatsustainablysupportthepublic. g. Science, technology, innovation and capacity building Innovation and modernizationofnationaldataandstatisticalsystemscandelivermoreefficient,rapidand reliable resilient information and enable better decision-making. Statistics producers are already actively making use of technology and innovation to respond to information needs, but to further help leverage opportunities, member states should strengthen investments, particularlysupportinglowresource statisticalsystems,todevelopcapacitiesinuseofscience,innovationandtechnology . Investments in geospatial information, earth observations, artificial intelligence, and other emerging technologies are essential for timely and increased coverage of insights that can support decision-making. For example, artificialintelligence(AI)analysisofsatelliteimagerycanprovidereal-time

A recent report by the World Economic Forum estimates thatEarthobservationhasthepotentialtodrive $3.8 trillion in economic benefits between 2023 and 2030. Equipping statistical agenciesanddeveloping capacity to integrate non-traditional data sources will be vital formoresustainabledevelopmentplanning and ensuring that the digital divide is not exacerbated. The Global Digital Compact of the Pact for the Future also calls onstakeholdersto“investinanddeployresilientdigitalinfrastructure,includingsatellites and local network initiatives, that provide safe and secure network coverage to all areas, includingrural, remote,and‘hard-to-reach’areas,andpromoteequitableaccesstosatelliteorbits,takingintoaccountthe needsofdevelopingcountries.” IV. Data, monitoring and follow-up Robust, independent official statistics areessentialtothecorefunctioningofgovernmentandsustainable financing. M ember states should reaffirm the importance of high-quality and granular data and statistics for decision-making, ensuring that all groups of thepopulationarevisibleandrepresentedto leave no-one behind. Member states should in this context acknowledge and strengthen the centralrole of national statistical systems in generating, disseminating, coordinatingandadministeringdatatoinform sustainable financing and other key national information needs.Memberstatesshouldcommittostepup investment from domestic and international sources in high-quality, timely, and reliable statistics and to enhance capacity-building through technical and financial support to developing countries for this purpose. To strengthen and build on the follow-up processes established by the Addis Agenda, member states should recommend that the United Nations Statistical Commission (UNSC), which brings together the Chief Statisticians of member states annually, isgiventhemandatetofollowuponthedataandstatistics related commitments in the FFD4 outcome. Part of the follow up could be to explore which national, regionalandglobalinitiativesarebestsuitedtosupportimplementationoftheFFD4commitments. V. Overarching reflections The Data For Now core partners invite countries to considerthefollowingtoimproveinvestmentsindata andstatisticsindevelopmentplanning: ● Integrate data and statistics into the core action areas of the FFD agenda and outcome document. ● Increasefinancingfordataandstatistics,particularlynationaldataandstatisticalinfrastructure ● Formalizefinancingfordataandstatisticsincountries’nationaldevelopmentplans ● Enhance financing strategies through strengthened partnerships between public, private, academic,civilsocietyanddevelopmentfundingagencies ● Implement systematic review and analysis of financing data gaps, also exploring possibilities of improvingcollaborationanddatasharingtobetterinformdata-drivenpolicy-making